Chapter 3. \| Section 2.
# Section 2. Understanding and Describing the Community
| Examine the community and record your findings in a community description or overview for credibility and awareness. |
- #### What is a community?
- #### What do we mean by understanding and describing the community?
- #### Why make the effort to understand and describe your community?
For those of us who work in community health and development, it's important to understand community -- what a community is, and the specific nature of the communities in which we work. Anything we do in a community requires us to be familiar with its people, its issues, and its history. Carrying out an intervention or building a coalition are far more likely to be successful if they are informed by the culture of the community and an understanding of the relationships among individuals and groups within it.
Taking the time and effort to understand your community well before embarking on a community effort will pay off in the long term. A good way to accomplish that is to create a community description -- a record of your exploration and findings. It's a good way to gain a comprehensive overview of the community -- what it is now, what it's been in the past, and what it could be in the future. In this section, we'll discuss how you might approach examining the community in some detail and setting down your findings in a community description.
## What is a community?
These various communities often overlap. A Black art teacher, for example, might see herself (or be seen by others) as a member of the Black, arts, and/or education communities, as well as of a particular faith community. Whichever community defines your work, you will want to get to know it well.
## What do we mean by understanding and describing the community?
Understanding the community entails understanding it in a number of ways. Whether or not the community is defined geographically, it still has a geographic context -- a setting that it exists in. Getting a clear sense of this setting may be key to a full understanding of it. At the same time, it's important to understand the specific community you're concerned with. You have to get to know its people -- their culture, their concerns, and relationships -- and to develop your own relationships with them as well.
- _Physical aspects_. Every community has a physical presence of some sort, even if only one building. Most have a geographic area or areas they are either defined by or attached to. It's important to know the community's size and the look and feel of its buildings, its topography (the lay of the land -- the hills, valleys, rivers, roads, and other features you'd find on a map), and each of its neighborhoods. Also important are how various areas of the community differ from one another, and whether your impression is one of clean, well-maintained houses and streets, or one of shabbiness, dirt, and neglect.
- _Infrastructure_. Roads, bridges, transportation (local public transportation, airports, train lines), electricity, land line and mobile telephone service, broadband service, and similar "basics" make up the infrastructure of the community, without which it couldn't function.
- _Patterns of settlement, commerce, and industry_. Where are those physical spaces we've been discussing? Communities reveal their character by where and how they create living and working spaces. Where there are true slums --  substandard housing in areas with few or no services that are the only options for low-income people -- the value the larger community places on those residents seems clear. Are heavy industries located next to residential neighborhoods? If so, who lives in those neighborhoods? Are some parts of the community dangerous, either because of high crime and violence or because of unsafe conditions in the built or natural environment?
- _Demographics_.  It's vital to understand who makes up the community.  Age, gender, race and ethnicity, marital status, education, number of people in household, first language -- these and other statistics make up the demographic profile of the population. When you put them together (e.g.,  the education level of black women ages 18-24), it gives you a clear picture of who community residents are.
- _Community leaders, formal and informal_. Some community leaders are elected or appointed -- mayors, city councilors, directors of public works. Others are considered leaders because of their activities or their positions in the community -- community activists, corporate CEO's, college presidents, doctors, clergy.  Still others are recognized as leaders because, they are trusted for their proven integrity, courage, and/or care for others and the good of the community.
- _Community culture, formal and informal_. This covers the spoken and unspoken rules and traditions by which the community lives. It can include everything from community events and slogans -- the blessing of the fishing fleet, the "Artichoke Capital of the World" -- to norms of behavior -- turning a blind eye to alcohol abuse or domestic violence -- to patterns of discrimination and exercise of power. Understanding the culture and how it developed can be crucial, especially if that's what you're attempting to change.
- _Existing institutions_. Every community has institutions that are important to it, and that have more or less credibility with residents. Colleges and universities, libraries, religious institutions, hospitals -- all of these and many others can occupy important places in the community. It's important to know what they are, who represents them, and what influence they wield.
- _Economics_.  Who are the major employers in the community?  What, if any, business or industry is the community's base? Who, if anyone, exercises economic power? How is wealth distributed? Would you characterize the community as poor, working, class, middle class, or affluent?  What are the economic prospects of the population in general and/or the population you're concerned with?
- _Government/Politics_. Understanding the structure of community government is obviously important. Some communities may have strong mayors and weak city councils, others the opposite. Still other communities may have no mayor at all, but only a town manager, or may have a different form of government entirely.  Whatever the government structure, where does political power lie? Understanding where the real power is can be the difference between a successful effort and a vain one.
- _Social structure_. Many aspects of social structure are integrated into other areas -- relationships, politics, economics -- but there are also the questions of how people in the community relate to one another on a daily basis, how problems are (or aren't) resolved, who socializes or does business with whom, etc. This area also includes perceptions and symbols of status and respect, and whether status carries entitlement or responsibility (or both).
**We'll discuss all of these aspects of community in greater detail later in the section.**
> There are obviously many more aspects of community that can be explored, such as health or education.  The assumption here is that as part of an assessment, you'll aim for a general understanding of the community, as described in this section, and also assess, with a narrower focus, the specific aspects you're interested in.
## Why make the effort to understand and describe your community?
### Some advantages to taking the time to understand the community and create a community description include:
- Gaining a general idea, even before an assessment, of the community's strengths and the challenges it faces.
- Getting a feel for the attitudes and opinions of the community when you're starting work on an initiative.
- Ensuring the security of your organization's staff and participants.  There may be neighborhoods where staff members or participants should be accompanied by others in order to be safe, at least at night. Knowing the character of various areas and the invisible borders that exist among various groups and neighborhoods can be extremely important for the physical safety of those working and living in the community.
- Providing background and justification for grant proposals.
- Knowing the context of the community so that you can tailor interventions and programs to its norms and culture, and increase chances of success.
## When should you make an effort to understand and describe the community?
- When you're new to a community and want to be well informed before beginning your work. If you've just started working in a community -- even if it's work you've been doing for years -- you will probably find that taking the time to write a community description enriches your work.
- When you've been working in a community for any length of time and want to take stock. Communities are complex, constantly-changing entities. By periodically stopping to write a detailed description of your community, you can assess what approaches have worked and what haven't; new needs that have developed over time and old concerns that no longer require your effort and energy; and other information to help you better do your work.
- When you're feeling like you're stuck in a rut and need a fresh perspective. Organizations have to remain dynamic in order to keep moving forward. Reexamining the community -- or perhaps examining it carefully for the first time -- can infuse an organization with new ideas and new purpose.
- When you're considering introducing a new initiative or program and want to assess its possible success.Aside from when you first come to a community, this is probably the most vital time to do a community description.
- When a funder asks you to, often as part of a funding proposal.
While researching and writing a community description can take time, your work can almost always benefit from the information you gather.
- Elected officials
- Community planners and development officers
- Chiefs of police
- School superintendents, principals, and teachers
- Directors or staff of health and human service organizations
- Health professionals
- Community activists
- Housing advocates
- Presidents or chairs of civic or service clubs -- Chamber of Commerce, veterans' organizations, Lions, Rotary, etc.
- People without titles, but identified by others as "community leaders"
- Business owners
### General Guidelines
**To begin, let's look at some basic principles to keep in mind.**
- _Be prepared to learn from the community_. Assume that you have a lot to learn, and approach the process with an open mind. Listen to what people have to say. Observe carefully. Take notes -- you can use them later to generate new questions or to help answer old ones.
- _Be aware that people's speech, thoughts, and actions are not always rational_. Their attitudes and behavior  are often best understood in the context of their history, social relations, and culture. Race relations in the U.S., for example, can't be understood without knowing some of the historical context -- the history of slavery, Jim Crow laws, and the work of Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Movement.
### Gathering information
> Observation can take many forms.  In addition to simply going to a place and taking notes on what you see, you might use other techniques -- Photovoice, video, audio, simple photographs, drawings, etc.  Don't limit the ways in which you can record your observations and impressions.
### Understanding the Community
Now let's consider what you might examine to understand and describe the community. You won't necessarily look for this information in the order given here, although it's a good idea to start with the first two.
**The community's physical characteristics.**
Get a map of the community and drive and/or walk around. (If the community isn't defined by geography, note and observe the areas where its members live, work, and gather.) Observe both the built and the natural environment. In the built environment, some things to pay attention to are:
- _Commercial areas_.  Are there stores and other businesses in walking distance of residential areas or of public transportation for most members of the community? Do commercial buildings present windows and displays or blank walls to pedestrians? Is there foot traffic and activity in commercial areas, or do they seem deserted? Is there a good mix of local businesses, or nothing but chain stores? Are there theaters, places to hear music, a variety of restaurants, and other types of entertainment? Do many buildings include public spaces -- indoor or outdoor plazas where people can sit, for example? In general, are commercial areas and buildings attractive and well-maintained?
- _The types and location of industrial facilities_. What kind of industry exists in the community? Does it seem to have a lot of environmental impact -- noise, air or water pollution, smells, heavy traffic? Is it located close to residential areas, and, if so, who lives there? Is there some effort to make industrial facilities attractive -- landscaping, murals or imaginative color schemes on the outside, etc?
I **n the category of natural features, we can include both areas that have been largely left to nature, and "natural" spaces created by human intervention.**
- _Topography_. An area's topography is the shape of its landscape. Is the community largely hilly, largely flat, or does it incorporate areas of both? Is water -- rivers, creeks, lakes and ponds, canals, seashore -- a noticeable or important part of the physical character of the community? Who lives in what areas of the community?
- _Open space and greenery._ Is there open space scattered throughout the community, or is it limited to one or a few areas? How much open space is there? Is it mostly man-made (parks, commons, campuses, sports fields), or is there wilderness or semi-wilderness? Does the community give the impression  of being green and leafy, with lots of trees and grass, or is it mostly concrete or dirt?
- _Air and water_. Is the air reasonably clear and clean, or is there a blanket of smog? Does the air generally smell fresh, or are there industrial or other unpleasant odors? Do rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water appear clean? Do they seem to be used for recreation (boating, swimming, fishing)?
> There is an overlap between the community's physical and social characteristics. Does the lay of the land make it difficult to get from one part of the community to another? (Biking, or in some cases even walking, is difficult in San Francisco, for example, because of the length and steepness of the hills.)  Are there clear social divisions that mirror the landscape -- all the fancy houses in the hills, all the low-income housing in the flats, for instance?
**Community demographics.**
- Racial and ethnic background
- Age.  Numbers and percentages of the population in various age groups
- Marital status
- Family size
- Education
- Employment - Both the numbers of people employed full and part-time, and the numbers of people in various types of work
- Location - Knowing which groups live in which neighborhoods or areas can help to recruit participants in a potential effort or to decide where to target activities
**Community history.**
This can be a complex topic. The "standard" history -- when the community was founded and by whom, how long it has existed, how people lived there in the past, its major sources of work, etc. -- can often be found in the local library or newspaper archives, or even in books or articles written for a larger audience. The less comfortable parts of that history, especially recent history -- discrimination, conflict, economic and/or political domination by a small group -- are may not be included, and are more likely to be found by talking to activists, journalists, and others who are concerned with those issues. You might also gain information by reading between the lines of old newspaper articles and tracking down people who were part of past conflicts or events.
**Community government and politics.**
- Go to open meetings of the city council, town boards, board of selectmen, or other bodies, as well as to public forums on proposed actions, laws, and regulations.  Such meetings will be announced in the local paper.
> In most of the U.S., these meetings are public by state law, and must be announced in specific ways at least two days ahead.
- Community bylaws and regulations are often available at the public library.
- Make an appointment to talk to one or more local government officials.  Many hold regular office hours, and might actually take pleasure in explaining the workings of the local government.
- Talk to community activists for a view of how the government actually operates, as opposed to how it's supposed to operate.
The politics of many communities embody the ideal of government working for the public good. In other communities, politics takes a back seat to economics, and politicians listen largely to those with economic power -- the CEO's, owners, and directors of large businesses and institutions.  In still others, the emphasis is on power itself, so that political decisions are made specifically to keep a particular party, group, or individual in control.
Obviously, only in the first case is the public well served. In the other situations, fairness and equity tend to go out the window and decisions favor the powerful. Understanding the politics of the community -- who has power, who the power brokers are, who actually influences the setting of policy, how decisions are made and by whom, how much difference public opinion makes -- is fundamental to an understanding of the community as a whole.
There's no formal way to get this information. Government officials may have very different interpretations of the political scene than activists or other community members. You'll have to talk to a variety of people, take a good look at recent political controversies and decisions (here's where newspaper archives can come in handy), and juggle some contradicting stories to get at the reality.
**Institutions.**
Community institutions, unless they are dysfunctional, can generally be viewed as assets. Finding them should be easy: as mentioned above, the Chamber of Commerce will probably have a list of them, the library will probably have one as well, the local newspaper will often list them, and they'll be in the phone book.
**They cover the spectrum of community life, including:**
- Offices of local, state, and federal government agencies (Welfare, Dept. of Agriculture, Office of Immigration, etc.)
- Public libraries.
- Religious institutions. Churches, synagogues, mosques.
- Cultural institutions.  Museums, theaters, concert halls, etc. and the companies they support.  These may also encompass community theater and music companies run and staffed by community volunteer boards and performers.
- Community centers.  Community centers may provide athletic, cultural, social, and other (yoga, support groups) activities for a variety of ages.
- YMCA's and similar institutions.
- Senior centers.
- Hospitals and public health services.
- Colleges and universities.
- Public and private schools.
- Public sports facilities. These might be both facilities for the direct use of the public -- community pools and athletic fields, for example -- or stadiums and arena where school, college, or professional teams play as entertainment.
**Groups and organizations.**
**These groups can fall into a number of categories:**
- _Advocacy organizations_. These may also provide services, but generally in the form of legal help or advocacy with agencies to protect the rights of specific groups or to push for the provision of specific services. By and large, they advocate for recognition and services for populations with particular characteristics, or for more attention to be paid to particular issues.
- _Service clubs_. Lions, Rotary, Kiwanis, Elks, Masons, etc.
- _Veterans' organizations_. In the U.S., the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars are the major veterans' organizations, but many communities may have others as well.
- _Chamber of Commerce and other business organizations_. Some of these may be oriented toward specific types of businesses, while others, like the Chamber, are more general.
- _Groups connected to institutions_. Church youth or Bible study groups, school clubs, university student groups (e.g., Foreign Students' Association, community service groups).
- _Trade unions_. These may be local, or branches of national or international unions.
- _Sports clubs or leagues_. Enthusiasts of many sports organize local leagues that hold regular competitions, and that may compete as well with teams from other communities. In many rural areas, Fish and Game clubs may function as informal community centers.
- _Informal groups_. Book clubs, garden clubs, parents' groups, etc.
**Economics/employment.**
**Social structure.**
### Describing the Community
Once you've gathered the information you need, the next step is describing the community. This is not really separate from understanding the community: in the process of organizing and writing down your information, you'll be able to see better how it fits together, and can gain greater understanding.
For a fuller picture, you could add photographs of some of the locations, people, conditions, or interactions you describe (perhaps as a Photovoice project), as well as charts or graphs of demographic or statistical information. For even more detail, you might compose a portrait in words of the community, using quotes from interviews and stories of community history to bring the description to life.
Given the availability of technology, you don't have to limit yourself to any specific format. Computers allow you to easily combine various media -- photos, graphics, animation, text, and audio, for example. The description could  add in or take the form of a video that includes a tour of the community, statements from and/or interviews with various community members (with their permission, of course), an audio voice-over, maps, etc.  A video or a more text-based description -- or both -- could then be posted to a website where it would be available to anyone interested.
Once you have a description put together, you might want to show it to some of the community members you talked to in the course of exploring the community. They can suggest other things you might include, correct errors of fact, and react to what they consider the accuracy or inaccuracy of your portrait and analysis of their community. With this feedback, you can then create a final version to use and to show to anyone interested. The point is to get as informative and accurate a picture of the community as possible that will serve as a basis for community assessment and any effort that grows out of it.
The last word here is that this shouldn't be the last community description you'll ever do. Communities reinvent themselves constantly, as new buildings and developments are put up and old ones torn down, as businesses move in and out, as populations shift -- both within the community and as people and groups move in and out -- and as economic, social, and political conditions change. You have to keep up with those changes, and that means updating your community description regularly.  As with most of the rest of the community building work described in the Community Tool Box, the work of understanding and describing the community is ongoing, for as long as you remain committed to the community itself.
## In Summary
Contributor
Chris Hampton
Catie Heaven
**Online Resources**
**Print Resources**
Jones, B. (1979). Defining your neighborhood. _In Neighborhood Planning: A Guide for Citizens and Planners_. Chicago, IL: Planners Press, pp. 8-11.
Scheie, D. (1991). August-September). Tools for taking stock. _The Neighborhood Works_. Chicago, IL: Center for Neighborhood Technology, pp. 16-17.
Spradley, J. P. (1980). Locating a social situation. _In Participant Observation_. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, pp. 45-52.
Warren, R.B., Warren, D.I. (1977). _The Neighborhood Organizer's Handbook_. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, pp.167-196.

# Enhancing Community Profile Development: Identifying Community Characteristics and Behavior Templates
Carol J. Forrest Rose Hill Communications, Inc.
Ove rvi ew of framewo rk fo r gathe ri ng information and performing enhanced analyses of community and stakeholder characteristics and behaviors (Interactive lecture)
Case stud ies/team exe rcises
Team p resentations of case study fi nd i ngs and suggestions for CI plans
# Learning Objectives
C I dentify re l evant demog raph i c and othe r characteristics to define stakeholder groups
Pe rfo rm basi c analyses of local pol iti cal , social, and economic structures and dynamics
Assess the l i kely geog raph ical extent of interest in the issue in question
I dentify tem plates of stakeholde r behavio r
# What is a Community Profile?
0 The p rofi l e is used to g u ide the deve lopment of the community involvement plan
# Benefits of Community Profiling
C Al lows identifi cation of al l stakeholde r g rou ps
H e l ps u s i d e nt ify :
Stakeholde r q uestions and conce rns
M ethods that wi l l best engage al l stakeholde rs i n a meaningful dialogue
P rovides p roject team mem be rs with an understanding of the community
# The Enhanced Community Profiling Process Goes a Step Further
Rigo rous p rocess of analyzi ng the i nfo rmation that is gathered—and then gathering more information to confirm conclusions:
I nvolves analyzi ng com m u n ity social , pol iti cal , and economic structures and dynamics
I d e n t i f i e s f l ow of i n fo rm at i o n i n co m m u n i ty
Dete rm i nes the deg ree to wh ich decision - maki ng p rocesses include or exclude stakeholder groups
I dentifi es barri e rs that cou ld keep ce rtai n stakeholde r groups from meaningful participation
# Enhanced Profiling—What Else We Look For
0 I n add ition to social , pol iti cal , and econom i c structure and dynamics, we look at other attitudes and behaviors
We u s e t h i s i n fo rm at i o n to :
B u i ld u pon existi ng i nfo rmation -shari ng , decision - making structures and dynamics, or
M iti gate barri e rs to mean i ngfu l stakeholde r participation
# Enhanced Profiling Has Predictive Value
By u nde rstand i ng com m u n ity dynam ics and identifying usual templates of behavior, enhanced profiling can help us predict likely responses to information by the community.
• Th us , C I p rofessionals are i n a bette r position to anticipate concerns and reactions, and work with, rather than against, community behaviors
# Benefits of Community Profiling to Clients
Pa rt i cu l a rly i n th e p rivate secto r , a g ood profile can demystify stakeholder and community attitudes and behaviors for clients
C C l i e n ts a re m o re l i ke l y to s u p p o rt C I effo rts and engage in meaningful dialogues if they understand stakeholders and their concerns
# Increasing Need for Good Profiling
As ou r society becomes mo re econom ical ly stratified, senior managers are less likely to be familiar with others outside their class
• Sen io r manage rs are also l ess l i ke ly to l ive i n the communities in which the facilities, sites, or projects for which they are responsible are located
0 Resu lt can be d iscon nects on cl ient’s and community's sides
# How We Develop an Enhanced Profile
We use an ite rative p rocess : We gathe r some information, analyze it, refine inquiries, gather additional information.
• We s u bj e ct i n fo rm at i o n (f ro m i n te rv i ews , document reviews) to a series of questions to determine what we think it means, then we confirm or disprove our assumptions by gathering additional information
# How We Develop an Enhanced Profilecontinued
We typ i cal ly pe rfo rm th ree majo r rou nds of information gathering and analyses
We a l s o “te st” t h e “facts” we o bta i n d u ri n g interviews against the documents we review to reveal inconsistencies
# Identifying Inconsistencies: What They Can Tell Us
0 Pe rsons i nte rvi ewed say that a faci l ity has fires and spills "all the time"; records reveal only two such incidents in a ten-year period
Does th is i nd i cate a pe rception among stakeholders that this particular facility is lax and its management untrustworthy? Why? Are there other issues in play? Is this an overall perception of industry?
# Identifying Inconsistencies: What They Can Tell Us
0 Pe rsons i nte rviewed say the re are on ly “a few” Chinese residents in the neighborhood; Census data indicate that twelve percent of the neighborhood population is Chinese
Does th is i nd icate that the Ch i nese popu lation keeps to themselves (e.g., shops elsewhere, recreates elsewhere)? Or that other residents simply assume when they see Chinese residents that they live somewhere else? What might this mean if we want to reach out to Chinese residents and include them in a neighborhood-wide dialogue?
# Identifying Inconsistencies: What They Can Tell Us
# Inconsistencies Are Our Friends!
Often i nconsistencies reveal “conventional wisdom" that needs to be taken into account when designing a CI program
# Enhanced Profiling-Recap
0 We gathe r the same types of i nfo rmation that anyone developing a community profile would gather, but we also:
Pe rfo rm rou nds of analyses , su bjecti ng the gathered information to a series of questions designed to gain a more complete understanding of the way a community functions
Test statements made d u ri ng i nte rviews agai nst documents to reveal inconsistencies that can point to deeply held attitudes and concerns
# In Enhanced Community Profiling, We Use an Iterative Process
# Information Gathering Techniques
I nte rvi ews
I n pe rson Telephone
Docu ment research
Li b rary “hard-copi es”
FO IA (agency fi les)
I nte rnet resou rces
# Information Gathering TechniquesContinued
• A wo rd on su rveys and q uestion nai res • Co rpo rations often rely on these devi ces to identify attitudes and concerns, however:
P rofessional researche rs develop su rveys and questionnaires only after extensive qualitative research (e.g., interviews, focus groups) to ensure that they know what they are measuring
S u rveys are bette r used to measu re success of a community involvement program, not to profile the community
# Interviewing
C I n -pe rson i nte rvi ews are often p refe rred by clients (viewed as "real" interviews), but they aren't always practical
• I n some cases thei r effectiveness is red uced by anxiety on the part of the person being interviewed, who may be wondering when it's going to be over
M ay be viewed as mo re respectfu l than telephone interview
# Interviewing
Telephone i nte rviews can be as effective as in-person interviews
• May be mo re effective ; pe rson bei ng interviewed knows that they can hang up at any time, so anxiety regarding "when is this going to be over" is lessened
M ay be viewed as less respectfu l than i n - person interview
# Interviewing
I p refe r to offe r t h e o pt i o n of i n - p e rs o n o rtelephone interviews
I typ i ca l l y p e rfo rm a b o u t h a l f of m y i n te rv i ews in person, half over the phone
Qual ity is basical ly the same
# Selecting Persons to Interview
O Strive to obtai n a cross-section of the community or of those who are affected, perceive themselves as affected, or are interested in the issue in question
# Selecting Persons to Interview
U se websites , newspape r sto ries , agency files to identify persons to interview
• Ask fo r refe rrals to identify add itional pe rsons to interview; however, don't allow formal or informal leaders to steer you away from groups you know exist (from demographic research)
G et as many poi nts-of-view as p racticable to test" the information you are gathering
# Selecting Persons to Interview
0 Fo rmal l eade rs , i ncl ud i ng e l ected offi cials and staff members, e.g., city environmental personnel, planning personnel, social services personnel
• S uch pe rsons can usual ly be identifi ed on m u n i ci pal and/or county websites
0 Cou rtesy i nte rviews , as necessary, with appl icable state and federal legislators
N ote : Review of newspape r sto ries , agency fi les , can indicate whether legislators are taking an active interest, or may simply need to be briefed
# Selecting Persons to Interview
C Cham be r of Com me rce and Reg ional Business, Planning, or Land Use Groups, Councils of Government
# Selecting Persons to Interview
C ivi c, eth n i c, and i nte rest g rou p/advocacy group organizations
P rovide add itional viewpoi nts , often make good referrals to "average" and "concerned" residents
# Selecting Persons to Interview
N e i g h bo rhood o rgan izations , ch u rch g rou ps
0 Yet mo re vi ewpoi nts ; typi cal ly close r to "average" residents than "formal" leaders
# Selecting Persons to Interview
0 Residents (of the area i n q uestion) , and someti mes , residents "at large" to test overall community concerns or attitudes
• I dentify th roug h refe rrals , mentions i n newspape r stories, agency files (Note: when approaching residents, tell them who referred you or where you learned of them)
• Don ’t fo rget com me rcial , i nd ustrial , and p u b l i c secto r neighbors: they may have concerns regarding employee, patron exposures
# Selecting Persons to Interview-Other Possibilities
N ewspape r reporte rs and blogge rs
Repo rte rs and blogge rs can often p rovide the inside scoop, but they may also want to report on your conversation (most will agree to wait)
# Selected Persons to Interview—Other Possibilities
Area h isto rians (These fol ks wi l l be discussed later)
# Selecting Persons to Interview—Other Possibilities
School pe rson ne l and l i b rarians • These fol ks often p rovide excel lent i nfo rmation on "new" residents, non-English-speaking residents, how engaged segments of the population are, how they like to be engaged, and community issues that may not be mentioned by elected officials
# Selecting Persons to Interview—Other Possibilities
Shopkeepe rs
0 Can gathe r i nfo rmation on envi ron mental conce rns , views of various segments of the local environmental advocacy community, by talking to managers of sporting goods stores, nature stores, health-food stores, and new age and occult book stores
# Selecting Persons to Interview—Other Possibilities
• Pol i ce , com m u n ity pol i ci ng offi ce rs , fi re department , p u b l i c works
0 Fi re departments and pu bl ic wo rks manage rs also may be able to provide information on incidents and public environmental concerns
# Getting Into the Community
• I n i t i a l s o u rce s fo r o bta i n i n g i n te rv i ew refe r ra l s , especially of residents, can vary tremendously from community to community.
# Final Words on Interviewing
0 I n add ition to gathe ri ng i nfo rmation on conce rns regard i ng the issue in question, good interviews yield information on attitudes, community dynamics, and preferences for involvement
0 U se demog raph i c data to ensu re that you don ’t om it i m po rtant groups (Don't let local officials determine who you speak with)
Be wi l l i ng to app roach a wide cross-section of people (Tattoo Parlor-and-Quilt Shop approach)
Deve lop and use a l ist of q u estions , b ut l et i nte rvi ews wande r, too. People often need to talk for a while before they can actually verbalize their thoughts or concerns. Don't rush—often comments on other issues can yield important insights into overall attitudes toward government, industry, social issues, and the environment
# Statistics 101
Ach ievi ng a “rep resentative sam ple” depends on the variability of the population
• Translation—If the re are many d iffe rent potential stakeholder groups (as divided by demographics or opinions), then you will need to ensure that you interview enough individuals to achieve a representative view of the community
# Using Demographic Data to Ensure Representative Sampling
0 Check the makeu p of the pe rsons you have interviewed against demographic data to avoid missing segments of the community
Race , eth n i city, i ncome l eve ls are al l i m po rtant characteristics; however, length of time in the neighborhood is often the most important demographic characteristics
Some offi cials may i ntentional ly o r i nadve rtently stee r you away from some segments. Use demographic data to ensure that this doesn't happen
As a l re ady n ote d , refe r ra l s a re i m p o rta n t , b u t d o n ’ t re l y solely on them to identify persons to interview
# Pitfalls of Demographic Data
0 N ot a l l rac i a l o r et h n i c m i n o ri ty g ro u p s a re monolithic—dig deeper (e.g., newly arrived versus well-established immigrant groups may need to be treated as separate stakeholder groups)
• Many demog raph ic characte ristics—but wh ich ones matter in a given situation? (e.g., proximity to site might trump race, income)
0 Defi ne stakeholde r g rou ps by characte ristics that make sense
# Document Research—Types of Documents
O Demog raph i c i nfo rmation from Census B u reau
N ewspape rs
P lan n i ng and land use docu ments
Docu ments pe rtai n i ng to othe r sites i n area (e . g . , earlier profiles, transcripts of public meetings, responsiveness summaries)
• Question nai res and othe r su rvey data that may have been generated by academics, planning agencies
# Document Research—Types of Documents
Local h isto ries
N ews and com m u n ity blogs
# Census Data Can Reveal More Than Race and Income
0 Pe rcentages of popu lation who speak lang uages other than English
Levels of ed ucational ach ievement
• Pe rcentages of popu lation that com m ute to wo rk elsewhere
0 Pe rcentages of popu lation em ployed i n various industry/occupation categories (e.g., manufacturing, agriculture)
• “H ousehold Characte ristics” section can p rovide information on the percentages of "new" residents, how transient a neighborhood might be
# Using Census Data
0 U se Census data to he l p you asce rtai n how well represented racial or ethnic minorities, lower-income residents, or new residents are in news coverage, local government, and in the various organizations with whom you may work
Demog raph i cs is a g u ide—not the whol e story
# Newspapers
0 Mo re than any othe r med i u m , local newspape rs can typically provide a good overview of a community, its issues, and the people who live there.
Many newspape rs have closed o r red uced thei r col u m n inches with reduced readership
Some newspape rs d isplay sig n ificant ed ito rial biases
N ot al l areas you may be wo rki ng i n are cove red , o r covered well, by local or regional media
# Newspapers
Regard l ess of the i r sho rtcom i ngs , local newspapers can still provide considerable information to the astute reviewer
# Newspapers
• N owadays , most newspape rs mai ntai n searchable databases of their stories on their websites. Conducting searches can yield stories on specific topics, sites, organizations, and people
• Search fu nctions may om it sto ri es that can p rovide important information (information on how stakeholders behaved in the face of another, nonenvironmental issue)
• Database searches don ’t p rovide i nfo rmation on the other important issues being reported at the same time (e.g., stories can lack context)
# Newspapers
My p refe rence—su pplement database searches with a "hard copy" review of whole, back issues of newspapers (three to six months worth)
0 Th is revi ew p rovides the context i n wh i ch sto ri es appear, which can help you determine relative importance of community issues. If a "big story" exists, you want to be aware of it (even if it has nothing to do with your issue)
0 Revi ew p rovides i nsi g hts i nto social , pol iti cal , and economic issues and structure in community
# Newspapers
Revi ew of “hard cop i es” he l ps you identify people to interview
Review p rovides topics of conve rsation during interviews
• Best Case—Com m u n ity is cove red by more than one newspaper. In such cases, comparison of stories can provide insights into editorial biases
# Newspapers
0 C ivi c, advocacy, and i nte rest g rou ps often have websites. These websites can provide a wealth of information on who belongs and what their interests are.
• Li kewise , many g rou ps post newslette rs on - line that can provide additional, in-depth information on issues, members, and activities
Are some issues m issi ng ? Why?
# Land Use Plans, Area Plans
P rofessionals wo rki ng fo r co rpo rate cl i ents need to look at communities' plans to understand the direction the community is charting/hoping to chart for itself, particularly if their clients are considering buying or building a facility there
“T h e G e n t ri fy i n g I n d u st ri a l P a rk” “Goodbye and Good Riddance”
# Land Use Plans, Area Plans
# Land Use Plans, Area Plans
C reation of land use plans is often accompanied by significant public involvement. In some cases, documents describing the groups that weighed in, their concerns, and how opposing ideas were handled can provide excellent insights into stakeholders, community concerns, and the community's decision-making, problemsolving processes
If othe r i nvesti gations/cl ean u ps o r pe rm itti ng actions have taken place in the same community, review of associated documents can provide insights into how stakeholders view investigations/cleanups or permitting actions
# Local Histories
C Local h isto ries may be avai lable on websites , as pamphlets or handouts, or as books.
• Local h isto ri es can p rovide i nsi g hts i nto stakeholders' attitudes toward industry, pollution, government, and population segments in a community
# Local Histories
0 B l og s ra n g e f ro m fl uffy g oss i p , to se lfindulgent bore-fests, to overblown screeds, to thoughtful journaling and commentary
The last catego ry can p rovide usefu l i nfo rmation
U sefu l ness (and accu racy) are conti ngent on how well identified those making the comments are (comments from those who can hide their identities are often overly strident)
# Further Comments on Blogs and Information Gleaned from Social Media
C I n most cases , i nfo rmation gathe red from social media is anecdotal
U se blogs and social med ia to measu re the effectiveness of Cl efforts
# Beyond Specific Concerns—Back to Enhanced Analyses
C The social , pol iti cal , and econom i c characteristics of a community may be helpful to the community involvement process—or create significant challenges
# Reading the Community
A m aj o r g o a l of C I i s to e n s u re t h at a l l stakeholders who wish to be involved be able to participate in a meaningful way
• I t i s n ’ t e n o u g h to i d e n t i fy p ote n t i a l l y disenfranchised groups
M u st c raft a p rog ra m th at wi l l ove rco m e barriers to allow involvement
# Inclusive or Not?
0 Are the i nfo rmation -shari ng and decision - maki ng processes in the community inclusive—allowing/ encouraging involvement of all—or are processes non-inclusive?
0 Depends on the social , pol itical , and econom ic structure and dynamics of the community
# Social Characteristics
0 H ow stratified o r separated are stakeholde r groups along demographic lines, including:
Race R e l i g i o n E d ucation and occu pation
Length of ti me i n com m u n ity
# Impact of Social Stratification
0 Wi l l you need to hold many meeti ngs i n many venues to reach all potentially interested parties?
• Wi l l some g rou ps endeavo r to su pp ress i nvolvement of other groups, or feel that it's their job to "take over" the process?
“Boss” type of system—on ly top people consulted, and
I n -g ro u p co nt ro l—a pa rt i cu l a r st rat u m of society controls most decisions
• N ote that even i n col labo rative com m u n iti es some groups may be omitted, either intentionally, or because they fail to come forward without prompting (e.g., undocumented immigrants)
# Boss" or "In-Group" Control
) Com m u n iti es havi ng pol iti cal confi g u rations in which power is concentrated in a handful of people (or a particular group) are more likely to experience environmental justice issues, lawsuits, or bitter protests because residents have few other alternatives for providing input into the decision-making process
# Boss" or "In-Group" Control
C I p rofessionals m ust fi nd ways to i ncl ude and involve all stakeholders who are interested in, affected by, or perceive themselves as affected by a site, permitting action, project, etc.
C C ite reg u lato ry req u i re me nts (o r co rpo rate policies) to ensure involvement
0 Fi nd anothe r “b i g sti ck” to back you r activiti es
# Social Structure Revisited
As i n the case of “Boss” and “ I n -G rou p” control, communities having highly stratified social structures are also more likely to experience confrontations, protests, and lawsuits in the absence of opportunities for some stakeholders to engage in meaningful participation in decision making
# Economic Characteristics
P resence of a “B i g Fish” econom i cal ly, whether a government or private-sector entity, can have an impact on residents' willingness to engage in the community involvement process
• Lowe r- i ncome residents may not have access to Internet resources, or may face barriers, such as lack of time, transportation to attend meetings
# Geographical Extent of Concern
H ow do you ensu re that you are reach i ng al l stakeholders (geographically) who may be interested in, or feel they may be affected by, an issue without extending the reach of the CI program to ridiculous lengths?
# Geographical Extent of Concern
Two facto rs to conside r when dete rm i n i ng the geographical extent of concern
• Type of issu e (e . g . , as a ru l e , ai r issu es have the ability to mobilize people over large areas more readily than is usually the case with soil and limited groundwater contamination)
P u bl i c pe rception of “my com m u n ity”
# Geographical Extent of Concern
Pe rceptions of “my com m u n ity” can vary tremendously.
I n ru ral areas , residents may conside r enti re county (or more) to be "their community.'
0 I n othe r areas , “com m u n ity” bou ndari es are "hard," and people from one municipality or neighborhood wouldn't think of crossing into a neighboring jurisdiction to complain or protest (or would be repelled)
# Exceptions
• Peopl e who l ive along routes whe re contaminated soil will be transported may cross "hard" boundaries into the host community of the contaminated site to weigh in on activities
0 C I chal l enge eme rges when “outside rs” wish to join dialogue, and host community doesn't want them to (e.g., Channelview versus Deer Park on incineration of napalm)
# Geographical Extent of Concern
0 The best way to asce rtai n the l i kely geog raph ical extent of concern or interest is to ask persons being interviewed to define "their community" and to ask how far afield they would anticipate public interest in an issue
• Com ments made d u ri ng i nte rviews can someti mes be confirmed by viewing news coverage of other, similar issues (if the news stories indicate where the participants in meetings, protests, etc. live)
# Templates of Behavior
0 Com m u n ities—and often stakeholde r g rou ps within communities—typically exhibit specific templates" of behavior that they will employ whenever they are faced with an issue or concern
It is usefu l to know what th ese te m p lates are so you can anticipate them and possibly build them into the Cl effort
# Examples of Behaviors
P i cketi ng , march i ng , d is ru pti ng b usi nesses
F i l i n g l aws u i ts
C i rc u l at i n g p et i t i o n s
“Wo rki ng” with the med ia by p itch i ng sto ri es that tell stakeholders' side
Sol i citi ng assistance from state and fede ral agencies
# More Examples of Behavior
I nviti ng outside “expe rts” o r advocacy g rou ps to assist stakeholders or the community with the issue
# More Examples of Behavior
R e s i st i n g t h e effo rts of “o u ts i d e” exp e rts o r advocacy groups that offer assistance
# Templates of Behavior
Deviations i n usual behavio r may mark the entry of additional/new stakeholder groups or signal changes in the community (new residents have moved in and brought their own templates of behavior)
M ajo r deviations from usual activiti es can also signal the entry of an outside influence into the issue (Hidden Agenda)
# BTW—Where Do People Go For Information?
Th rou g hout the p rofi l i ng p rocess , one of the most important questions to ask is: where do people go for information? The answer often overlaps templates of behavior, demographic characteristics of stakeholder groups, and the social and political structure of the community
C M ust identify chan ne ls of i nfo rmation and the persons or groups deemed authoritative
# Other Important Attitudes and Behaviors
• Attitudes toward i nd ustry—e . g . , positive-p rovid i ng jobs, tax revenues, economic growth? Negativeindustry is "dirty," stigmatizes community?
Attitudes toward i nd ustry and contam i nated sites are also often influenced by residents' ties to the community. Do they commute elsewhere for work or they have lived in the community for a short time? In such cases, they may be less tolerant of "problems."
Conve rsely, contam i nation caused by a busi ness that is strongly disliked is unlikely to be "tolerated" by long-term residents
# Other Important Attitudes and Behaviors
0 Attitudes toward reg u lations—e . g . , positive-bel ieve regulations protect public? Negative-believe regulations hurt businesses? Negative-believe regulations are not strict enough?
0 Attitudes toward gove rn ment agencies—e . g . , positive-believe agencies are working to protect human health and the environment? Negativebelieve agencies are in the pocket of industry or don't care?
# Other Important Attitudes and Behaviors
Level of knowledge of/expe rience with environmental problems. If stakeholders have significant experience, has this led to bitterness, cynicism, or the belief that the community has been dumped on? Or has it led to familiarity with investigations and a measure of public confidence that residents and officials will be able to tackle this latest problem, too?
# Other Important Attitudes and Behaviors
Local newspape r/news cove rage patte rns— e.g., is the reporting objective?
Sensationalized? Is there a lack of reporting?
• N ote : lack of repo rti ng can create se rious problems because it means that at least some of the information that gets circulated will likely be rumors and misinformation
# Other Important Attitudes and Behaviors
P refe rences regard i ng th i rd-party autho riti es or spokespersons—e.g., what types of experts do stakeholders consider credible? Government agency personnel? Public health personnel? Outside consultants paid for by community?
# Case Study and Group Exercise
• E ach g rou p wi l l receive an i nfo rmation package on an issue and a community
• Review th is i nfo rmation and develop a tentative profile of the community and recommendations for a CI program
• You shou ld also develop “fi nd i ngs” of what you th i n k might be going on in the community, but that you would need more information to confirm
• List the types of i nfo rmation you th i n k m i g ht he l p you confirm or fine-tune your assumptions
# Case—"North Hennessy Valley Faces a New Challenge"
Case package i ncl udes :
Ove rview of i m pend i ng issue and map of area
S u m m a ry t ra n s c ri pts of i n te rv i ews f ro m t h e f i rst round of inquiry
U . S . Census data fo r nearby com m u n ities
Copies of othe r possi bly relevant docu ments
# End Notes
Add itional i nfo rmation on the com m u n ity profiling or assessment process is available on the conference website or on the publications page of my website
www. roseh i l lcom m u n ications . com/pu bl ications
To d i s c u ss a n y of t h i s i n fo rm at i o n f u rt h e r , I can be reached at [caroljforrest@aol.com](mailto:caroljforrest@aol.com) or (630) 510-9462

Teaser Component

# Community Test 2
Which of the following would be the best way to determine the health of a community?
a. Ask a firefighter which neighborhoods have the fewest fires.
b. Ask a realtor which neighborhoods have the most expensive houses.
c. Ask people living in the neighborhood if they are happy with where they live.
d. Ask the police department which neighborhoods have the lowest crime rates.
Click the card to flip 👆
A healthy community is one in which residents are happy with their choice of location and exhibit characteristics that would draw others to the location. Thus, the best way to determine the health of the community is to talk to those living in it.
Click the card to flip 👆
Which of the following would be the best way to determine the health of a community?
a. Ask a firefighter which neighborhoods have the fewest fires.
b. Ask a realtor which neighborhoods have the most expensive houses.
c. Ask people living in the neighborhood if they are happy with where they live.
d. Ask the police department which neighborhoods have the lowest crime rates.
A healthy community is one in which residents are happy with their choice of location and exhibit characteristics that would draw others to the location. Thus, the best way to determine the health of the community is to talk to those living in it.
Which of the following characteristics would be most indicative of a healthy community?
a. Excellent private schools and superb fire and police systems
b. A United Way that receives large donations each year
c. An extensive array of services offered by private physicians
d. Clean air and water and a sense of community cohesion
Although all items sound positive, a sense of community cohesion in a safe community (clean air and water) would be most helpful to its residents.
nurse was assessing the neighborhood near the health agency. The nurse drove around observing the condition of the buildings, sidewalks, and the people in the community. Which of the following best describes the actions of the nurse?
a. A drive-through
b. A neighborhood observation
c. A quick overview
d. A windshield survey
Which of the following would be the best definition of a community?
a. People with open boundaries living in a particular area
b. People gathered together to solve a particular problem
c. People with a sense of belonging or common identity
d. People with at least one common demographic characteristic
Which of the following is an essential characteristic of a community?
a. A geographic area with defined boundaries
b. A particular place over time for common purposes
c. A place and beliefs or value systems
d. A place or common demographic characteristics
The three common factors that constitute a community are people, place, and social interaction or common goals.
Which of the following is an example of a phenomenologic community?
a. The employees of Delco Manufacturing
b. The Miami Valley region
c. The village of Yellow Springs
d. The United States Census Bureau census tract #1017
All of the options are examples of geopolitical communities except the staff of a company, which is a phenomenologic community or a community based on relationships, not geopolitical boundaries.
Which of the following best describes a group?
a. Those who are all living in the same geopolitical area
b. Those who are all members of the same phenomenologic community
c. Those who engage in repeated face-to-face communication
d. Those who respect each other's perspective
A group consists of two or more people engaged in an interdependent relationship that includes repeated face-to-face communication.
When community/public health personnel speak of a community of solution, to what are they referring?
a. A community that has resolved its major problems at least temporarily
b. The area in which some problems are approached on a wider regional basis
c. The fact that communities have to solve their own problems
d. The reality that some problems have to be approached on a federal basis
A community of solution refers to the boundaries within which a problem can be identified, addressed, and solved. Such problems are often beyond one community's boundaries but affect several communities, which must work together to resolve the problem.
When a community is assessed from a developmental framework, which data must be determined?
a. The demographics (such as age) of the persons living in the community
b. The emotional maturity of the community's residents
c. The history of the community
d. The number and quality of daycare centers and schools
Although all the listed options may be helpful information, the development of a community would most easily be observed in its history. A developmental framework explores the history of a community to determine change and trends. Identifying trends in health status over time helps clarify health outcomes.
Which of the following would be the focus of a nurse who is using an epidemiologic framework to assess a community?
a. Interviewing health care professionals concerning the community
b. Researching findings from epidemiologic studies
d. Discovering groups among the community residents who are most at risk
In an epidemiologic framework, investigators examine the health of the community and suggest targeting programs toward the groups most at risk for illness or disability. Different aggregates have different health needs.
a. The subgroup can more easily afford health care services.
b. The subgroup has more political power and can influence health funding.
c. The subgroup has notably higher statistical risk for experiencing health problems.
d. The subgroup knows how to obtain publicity if their needs are not met.
Although all of the options present good reasons, the community/public health nurse tries to change factors that contribute to the vulnerability to health problems of high-risk groups
When assessing a community by using the structural-functional framework, the nurse recognizes that all communities must
a. Address financial needs of residents.
b. Engage in functions that can be measured.
c. Provide for socialization and a sense of identity.
d. Require that public safety structures be built.
All communities fulfill certain functions, including coordination, control, and direction of activities to attain goals, as well as socialization and identity for their members. Providing for both socialization and a sense of identity best address community goals and internal functioning.
A nurse is completing a community assessment by using a systems framework. Which of the following is the key to the success of the assessment?
a. Demanding a reasonable budget for assessment expenses
b. Telling everyone what he or she is doing so that the listener may have input
c. Using a tool to systematically identify, collect, and organize appropriate data
d. Allowing at least 2 weeks to collect data to ensure thoroughness
An organized framework helps the nurse collect appropriate data systematically. The systems model serves as a tool to help the nurse identify, collect, and organize appropriate data, include the critical components and their relationship to each other.
What is the first step in beginning a community assessment?
b. Creating a budget of both time and money to devote to assessment
c. Defining the community and determining its boundaries or parameters
d. Outlining the data needed and determining where they might be found
Before a community can be assessed, the exact community must be clearly delineated; the nurse accomplishes this by defining the community and determining its boundaries or parameters. This will determine what data the nurse will need to collect.
Why would a nurse be concerned when a community has relatively closed, rigid boundaries?
a. The community does not have an identity.
b. The community is probably resistant to change.
d. The nurse may have limited access to the community.
A closed, rigid system is resistant to change, whereas an open, more flexible system is more receptive to change and to help from the health care delivery system.
Which of the following events illustrates how the suprasystem affects a community as a system?
Only if the state dictates a legal requirement to a local community is it an instance of the suprasystem's directly affecting the (community) system.
How might the goals of communities best be summarized?
a. Ensuring that the community's history is remembered
b. Encouraging socialization with persons outside the community
c. Maximizing availability of financial and other resources
d. Promoting survival and maximizing the well-being of members
Communities must survive and ensure that the needs of community members are met, including the need for well-being.
Which demographic factors of a community are important for the nurse to consider when assessing a community?
a. Census tract data can be used to determine needed agency staffing.
b. Density of housing is associated with contagious infections.
c. Ethnicity determines how health is defined and protected.
d. Income determines what community services can be financed.
Although demographic factors (age, race, gender, ethnicity, and density of population) are important for many reasons, the focus of assessment is on promoting and maintaining health. Therefore, health as the community defines it must be understood. Ethnicity determines how the community addresses health problems and attempts to protect the health of its members.
Which of the following is an example of the relationship between demographic factors and health needs?
a. Persons with high incomes typically have nutritional problems resulting from diet choices.
b. Low educational level is associated with more health promotion behaviors.
c. Religion may suggest beliefs concerning use of contraception, health care, and food choices.
d. Being the majority population group, young adult men help determine which service agencies are most needed.
What might be the implications of knowing where members of the community are employed (i.e., their occupations)?
a. How or whether community members worship
b. How and when the community members prefer to engage in recreation
c. The diseases or injuries for which they may be at risk
d. Where residents do their grocery shopping and what they typically buy
Knowing the occupations may suggest particular diseases and injuries for which employees are at risk.
When a nurse assesses a community, which of the following components is essential to determine first?
a. Areas of strength
b. Areas of need
c. Balance of inputs to outputs
d. Openness to intervention
When assessing, whether individuals or systems, it is essential to determine areas of strength, as well as areas of need. Several chapters in the text emphasize that strengths should be assessed first because strengths are the tools used to address weaknesses.
A community/public health nurse is planning to implement a new community-based education program. Why is it crucial for the nurse to understand the organizational structure of a community, as well as its leadership?
a. The nurse may have to convince the informal leaders of the need for the program before it can be successful.
b. The nurse may need to ask the formal leaders to provide leadership for the programs.
c. The nurse will want to know political priorities before deciding on any actions to be taken.
It is important for the nurse to identify both formal and informal leaders. Informal leaders often have the social power, even though the formal leaders have the authority in decision making. To be successful in any kind of change, the nurse needs a thorough understanding of both the formal and informal leadership dynamics.
Which group of persons is least likely to be considered a vulnerable group at high risk for medical problems?
b. Intravenous drug users
c. Pregnant single teenage girls
d. Single adolescent boys
d. Cannot be determined from the given data
Which of the following is a very practical and feasible way of obtaining comprehensive community health data?
a. Completing a comprehensive survey with community residents
b. Performing a windshield survey
c. Requesting community residents respond to an Internet survey
d. Using data already collected and available on the Internet
What is the primary reason why entire populations are not surveyed to determine a community's health needs?
a. A nurse would not know how to conduct the survey.
b. Community members would refuse to answer questions.
c. Such a survey would be too expensive and time consuming.
d. No community agency would want to be responsible for the results.
Although a survey of an entire population would be informative, it is typically too impractical in time, cost, and ability to reach all community members.
A community/public health nurse wants to use key informants to gather additional information. Which of the following actions would be useful to perform first?
a. Sending an e-mail message to all community residents
b. Conducting a focus group with informal leaders from the community
c. Publishing a survey in the local newspaper
d. Requesting that children's parents complete a survey
Although any of these options might be useful, a focus group with the community's leaders would probably yield the most reliable data. Further meetings or focus groups might then concentrate on special at-risk groups.
c. Gathering external resources to help meet the needs of the community
One approach to community assessment is the problem-oriented approach. Using this approach, the nurse assesses a community in relation to a specific topic or health problem. The nurse begins the process with the problem or topic area and then assesses a specific community in relation to that topic. If a particular problem has been identified in previously collected data, the nurse should assess the community in relation to the identified need before gathering resources, working with others, or trying to help colleagues, who may have other priorities.
Which of the following conclusions would require the nurse to obtain more assessment data?
a. A major health problem is identified.
b. An identified subpopulation is seen to be at high risk for and vulnerable to medical problems.
c. Data that have been collected are incongruent and contradictory.
d. Strengths in the community outweigh the areas of weakness.
Which of the following are included in the subsystems of Anderson and McFarlane's definition of a community? (Select all that apply.)
a. Communication and health/social services
b. Demographics and census data
c. Economics and recreation
d. Physical environment and education
e. Politics and government
f. Safety and transportation
A, C, D, E, F
The eight subsystems are communication, health and social services, economics, recreation, physical environment, education, politics and government, and safety and transportation. Demographics and census data are not subsystems.
Which of the following are framework models currently in use in community health nursing? (Select all that apply.)
a. American Nursing Community Health Model (ANCHM)
b. Community-as-Partner model
c. Mobilization for Action through Planning and Partnerships (MAPP)
d. Helvie Energy Framework
e. General Ethnographic and Nursing Evaluation Studies in the State (GENESIS)
f. The geopolitical phenomenological model
There is no such model as ANCHM. Geopolitical and phenomenological models are two ways of addressing a community. Community-as-Partner, MAPP, Helvie Energy Framework, and GENESIS are all framework models currently in use in community health nursing.
A community/public health nurse employed by the local health department is told by the director to engage in health planning. Which of the following actions will the nurse perform?
a. Collecting and analyzing data
b. Serving vulnerable populations
c. Planning for health care needs of individuals
d. Applying the nursing process to community-based care
The director of a public health agency suggested that the community/public health nurse select the target population for a new program. Of the following populations, which would be considered the target population?
a. Persons for whom the nurse is most comfortable caring
b. Persons for whom some change in health or lifestyle behaviors is desired
c. Persons eligible for care according to federal guidelines
d. Persons that can afford to pay for their care
Although clients may be chosen as recipients of care for any of the reasons listed, the target population is typically persons for whom change in health-related behaviors is desired whom the community/public health nurse desires change, whether in lifestyle behaviors or health outcomes.
What was the significance of the National Health Planning and Resources Development Act of 1974?
a. It created the program that yielded the first evidence that managed care reduced costs.
b. It funded nationwide health planning to improve health care and reduce costs.
c. It provided additional federal money to the states to spend on health care.
d. It allowed states to take responsibility for planning health care services.
Before this Act was signed into law, planning was primarily at the state level. The Act provides federal funding to coordinate resources to meet documented needs.
What was the result of the prospective payment system legislation?
a. Hospital stays were shortened, which placed a greater responsibility on family care.
b. Payments to the hospitals and physicians that fulfilled the new rules were higher.
c. Nursing staffing was increased to meet the needs of more acutely ill patients.
d. Diagnoses were more accurate and complete before clients were admitted to acute care.
The prospective payment system changed the patterns of hospital billing and thereby altered patterns of inpatient hospital stays. Hospital stays were shortened, and more health service delivery responsibilities were the responsibility of community agencies and family members.
According to the American Nurses Association (ANA) and the American Public Health Association (APHA), the community/public health nurse is responsible primarily for whom?
a. The community as a whole
b. The employer who is paying the nurse's salary
c. The individual for whom the nurse is caring
d. The governmental unit that is responsible for its citizens
Both the ANA and the APHA state that the nurse's primary responsibility is to the community or population as a whole and that nurses must acknowledge the need for comprehensive health program planning to implement this responsibility.
Whether a nurse's plan of care for a community is acceptable is probably determined by which aspect of the plan?
a. It was created in coordination with community members.
b. It was financially feasible.
c. It was politically correct and feasible.
d. It was something in which the nurse really believes.
Stressed throughout Chapter 16 is the importance and need for the community to be involved in the planning. If the community is not involved from the beginning, the program may not be effective. The program is more likely to be successful if the community is involved.
Which of the following actions is a nurse most likely to perform in an approach to community health planning with the community empowerment model?
a. Motivating bankers and financial advisers to help the community in its development
b. Obtaining the best experts available to help the community develop
c. Using a grassroots approach and democratic decision making
d. Writing grants to obtain money for the community and health care programs
Although a nurse might well perform all of these actions, the definition of community development is to create progress for the community by actively involving community members. This grassroots approach entails the use of a democratic decision-making process, encourages self-help, relies on voluntary cooperation, and helps develop leadership within the group.
Which of the following facts is a drawback of the community empowerment model?
a. Bankers and other money people are very busy and often uninterested.
b. Grants, although beautifully written, may not get funded.
c. It is hard to persuade experts to volunteer their time.
d. It is the slowest approach and takes the longest to obtain results.
Although the community empowerment model may have the longest-lasting effects, it does take considerable time and effort to implement, because democratic decision making is a slow process.
How might the social planning model best be defined?
a. A process of experts engaging in rational, deliberate problem solving
b. A process of group meetings that take place until everyone reaches consensus
c. A process of collaboration to write grants to fund health care programs
d. A process of using democratic decision making through a grassroots approach
A social planning model is in existence when experts take responsibility for solving problems, sometimes with little community involvement. The community empowerment model uses democratic decision making through a grassroots approach.
How might the social action approach be summarized?
a. A process of experts engaging in rational, deliberate problem solving
b. A process of group meetings that take place until everyone reaches consensus
c. A process in which groups seek redistribution of power or basic change in organizational policies
d. A process in which groups work together to write several grants to get money for health care programs
The social action approach is a process in which direct, often confrontational action is undertaken to redistribute power, resources, or decision making in the community, to effect a change in the basic policies of formal organizations, or both.
A community/public health nurse is using the social action model to facilitate change in the community. Which of the following aspects of this model may make the nurse feel uncomfortable?
a. Admitting that the nurse may not know the best approach
b. Cooperating with a large number of community agencies
c. Confronting power brokers directly
d. Sharing decision making with other people
This approach requires direct confrontation to obtain redistribution of power, resources, or decision making, which may be uncomfortable for anyone.
Lewin's change theory is being applied as the community is addressing improvements in public safety. Which of the following would be one of the first steps in creating change?
a. Determining whether anyone else agrees
b. Having a careful plan as to what change is desirable
c. Making community members aware of the need for change
d. Assessing community needs to determine whether change is possible
The first step is to ensure that the need for change is recognized or felt by people in a position to help create the change. Disequilibria exist or are created, which disrupts the status quo. The stimulus for the perceived need may be within the client or come from an outside force.
People in the community are feeling insecure and vulnerable because the neighborhood is considering closing one of the local elementary schools. Which of the following actions should a nurse take?
a. Ask the formal leader of the group to speak out against the closure.
b. Ask the informal leader to offer a rationale for the closure.
c. Offer help and support for those involved.
d. Offer to write legislators opposing the decision.
The nurse must recognize that change is threatening and anxiety provoking, and so individuals will need help and support while they experience the proposed change. Asking other people to take a leadership role to speak out against the closure would not be appropriate. Writing to legislators may be effective, but it is not the best action when trying to work with people who are feeling vulnerable and insecure.
A nurse would like to facilitate a change within the community. Which of the following actions is the nurse likely to take, in view of Lewin's theory of change?
a. Freezing the change by constant persuasion, reinforcement, and use of focus groups
b. Increasing driving forces, decreasing restraining forces, or doing both
c. Stabilizing change by decree, rules and procedures, or legislation
d. Unfreezing the change by using the three techniques described by Lewin
Lewin described forces that facilitate change (driving forces) or impede change (restraining forces). Driving forces must exceed restraining forces in order for change to occur. Therefore, the nurse may increase driving forces, decrease restraining forces, or attempt to do both.
What is the purpose of Planned Approach to Community Health (PATCH)?
a. To enable assessment by different health institutions in order to maximize resources
b. To encourage assessment of high-risk groups so that efforts can be focused
c. To engage entire geopolitical communities in assessing their health needs
d. To suggest that states cooperate with federal departments to ensure continuity
PATCH is an attempt to engage entire geopolitical communities in a comprehensive assessment of their health needs, rather than focusing solely on groups at high risk or those served by a specific health institution. It depends on the participation of citizens, the cooperation of several organizations within the community, and the vertical integration of local, state, and federal government resources.
A nurse is initiating program planning. Which of the following actions will the nurse perform first?
a. An accurate and thorough assessment of the community
b. A confirmation of the formal and informal leaders of the community
c. A determination of the budget available for obtaining relevant data
d. An analysis of the employer's perspective on potential program needs
Although all of the actions may need to be performed when a program is planned, programs cannot be planned before a comprehensive accurate and thorough assessment.
Which of the following actions should the nurse perform when analyzing collected assessment data?
a. Categorizing the data and identifying the implications
b. Creating graphs, charts, and maps to display the data
c. Determining the aggregates at high risk for specific problems
d. Identifying target populations by demographic characteristics
All of the actions would be performed very early in the process, but the data must first be categorized to identify the inferences that are descriptive of actual or potential health problems.
A nurse is reviewing the collected data and discovers some information is not available. Which of the following conclusions will the nurse make?
a. There is a data gap.
b. There is insufficient information to draw appropriate conclusions.
c. Further effort by the team is required.
d. Further analysis needs to be performed.
A lack of information is called a data gap. The nurse may devise a strategy to collect additional data or draw the conclusion that the data gap itself may be informative.
Which of the following data would be more typical of an acute care diagnosis than a community/public health nursing diagnosis?
a. A child in the school system admitted for insulin overdose
b. Health promotion needs for the neighborhood school
c. Mortality and morbidity rates for the city
d. Services unavailable in the county
A diagnosis referring to a need could be based on any of the selections, but community/public health focuses on aggregates, not individuals, and so the child being admitted would have what is more typical of an acute care nursing diagnosis.
A nurse is preparing to write a community diagnosis. Which of the following actions must the nurse take?
a. Choosing a diagnosis from the 12 functional health patterns
b. Choosing from an agency-approved list of NANDA International diagnoses
c. Describe a situation and suggest an etiologic component focused on an aggregate
d. Use appropriate NANDA International wellness-focused diagnoses
Any of the options might be chosen; however, to write a community/public health diagnosis, the nurse must maintain the focus on aggregates in a specific environment or community. A diagnosis is a statement that synthesizes assessment data, as well as a label that describes a situation and implies an etiologic component.
What do most community/public health nursing diagnoses include?
a. The afflicted individual or family, risk factors, and the desired outcome
b. The aggregate at high risk and the nurse's decision as to appropriate care
c. The target population, the health response desired, and host or environmental factors
d. The NANDA International terminology with associated evidence and outcomes
Community/public health nurses focus not on individuals but on aggregates, and they rarely use NANDA International diagnoses, which focus primarily on acute problems of individuals.
Which of the following actions must the nurse take when confirming the diagnosis before final decisions are made?
a. Ensuring that it is a diagnosis used in the Omaha diagnosis system
b. Checking to see whether the diagnosis is reimbursable
c. Prioritizing the diagnosis within the agency's mission
d. Validating the diagnosis/conclusion with the community or client
Although the nurse might engage in any of these actions, the most important action is to validate the conclusions with the involved aggregate.
Which of the following is the most effective way of prioritizing nursing diagnoses?
a. Ensuring that the diagnoses are reimbursable by third-party payers
c. Comparing the diagnoses with the agency's mission statement
d. Discussing conclusions with another community/public health nurse
Although the nurse might engage in any of these actions, the most effective way to prioritize nursing diagnoses is to choose the diagnosis most important to the involved aggregate.
A nurse decided to set up a planning group. All of the following groups of people expressed interest in being involved in the planning along with the nursing staff. If the nurse must eliminate one group to keep the size of the group manageable, which of the following groups should the nurse eliminate?
a. A convenience selection of local citizens
b. Formal and informal leaders of the community
c. Those who are probably going to be against the intervention
d. The aggregate for which the intervention is going to be implemented
Which of the following groups should be included in any planning group to ensure that weaknesses are addressed and counterarguments are known?
a. Administrators from the local hospital or hospitals
b. Administrators of the health care agency
c. Leaders in the community
d. Those initially expected to resist the proposal
People who are against the proposal are the most helpful in knowing what arguments will be used and what weaknesses are apparent in the proposal. It is always possible that they may become involved and become supporters.
Which of the following aspects of a solution to a problem allows the nurse to identify it as the best choice?
a. It must be financially reimbursable.
b. It must have the support of the clinical agency.
c. It must represent the values, beliefs, and perceptions of the involved aggregate.
d. It must have the most advantages and the fewest disadvantages.
Although all these suggestions are extremely important, the most crucial is that the solution fit the community's perspective, beliefs, and values. The community must be motivated to address the issue.
Which of the following situations will cause difficulties when a nurse tries to persuade a community to accept a particular intervention?
a. The solution is oriented to the future, not the present.
b. Powerful groups in the community may not be committed to this intervention.
c. The intervention is inconsistent with cultural, ethnic, or religious beliefs.
d. The intervention may need more tax dollars than have currently been funded.
Although any of these situations could cause a community to reject a proposed intervention, any intervention that is inconsistent with beliefs and values will be immediately rejected.
The intervention that a nurse and a planning group proposed was not accepted, primarily because of poor timing and lack of funds. Which of the following is helpful for the nurse to remember?
a. At least an effort was made to intervene.
b. The situation will probably not get worse.
c. The communities can function without the proposed program.
d. There are always other options that might meet the same goals.
A problem can almost always be solved in more than one way.
What is the primary reason why every step of an intervention is planned before the intervention is implemented?
a. It is required by the nursing process procedure.
b. It is the way in which agencies expect to see performance by the nurse.
c. It saves time, and the implementation process goes more smoothly.
d. It allows the nurse to remember what was going to be done.
Planning the intervention saves time and helps the implementation process go more smoothly.
What is the primary usefulness of a Gantt chart?
a. It creates a deadline for each step.
b. It describes potential program problems.
c. It identifies the process needed to achieve a certain result.
d. It outlines the steps of the assessment process.
A Gantt chart identifies the process needed to achieve a result. Once the final outcome is identified, the major steps necessary to obtain the result are projected backward from results to actions; their timing and sequence are then considered.
What is the primary usefulness of a Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) chart?
a. It creates a flowchart of activities in sequence with time estimates.
b. It identifies potential program problems and possible solutions.
c. It identifies the process needed to achieve a certain result.
d. It outlines the steps of the assessment process.
A PERT chart identifies the program activities, resources to accomplish these activities, and the sequence of those activities. Included is a flowchart designed to estimate the time required to complete specific events necessary, with estimates ranked according to optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic outcomes.
The nurse is planning to present an educational program. Which of the following is important for the nurse to remember?
a. Having many handouts so that the audience can remember what was said
b. Ordering a microphone so that everyone in the room can hear easily
c. Using pictures and posters of professionals demonstrating the needed behaviors
d. Using many different methods of presentation with multimedia art
As members of a media society, most audiences expect a smooth, professional presentation with the use of many different media. Handouts alone may be unsuccessful, because not all Americans are literate. Reading levels must always be considered. Demonstrations by professionals may be unsuccessful unless their ethnic and cultural backgrounds are similar to those of the audience. Lecture is considered the least effective way of conveying information.
A health screening was held, and the nurse reported the number and names of persons with positive test results to the agency director. What, however, is even more important than reporting this information?
b. Keeping legal documentation of both negative and positive results
c. Telling the person with positive test results where they might go for treatment
d. Using the cheapest screening approach possible
Which of the following is the most common type of intervention used to improve the health of a community?
a. Providing direct care to individuals at high risk for health problems and for their families
b. Offering health education and screening programs
c. Using media campaigns to raise awareness of the health needs
Several major types of community health intervention programs exist, primarily health-education programs, screening programs, establishing services, policy setting and implementation, increasing community self-help and competence, and increasing power among disenfranchised individuals.
Why should nursing, as a profession, be involved in program planning? (Select all that apply.)
b. Nurses have enough political power to create barriers if they are not included in the planning process.
c. Nurses, who constitute one third of all health care providers, implement the majority of planned programs.
d. Nurses make up a large portion of health care consumers.
e. Politically, it is wise to include all professions in planning groups.
f. Nurses provide the most expertise of the health care professions.
a. It facilitates additional decision making.
b. It clarifies the actual care involved in the service.
c. It is required by accrediting agencies.
d. It demonstrates that outcomes of the program were met.
Evaluation yields data, which allow better comprehension and therefore better decisions. The purpose of evaluation is to facilitate additional decision making. The evaluation will help show whether the outcomes of the program have or have not met the goals.
Which of the following is a necessary assumption for evaluation to occur?
a. Accrediting agencies focus on careful documentation.
b. Actions have both intended and unintended results.
c. Nursing care is dependent on the reimbursement available.
d. People expect professionals to document their care.
Assumptions are that nurses are accountable for their own action and that nursing actions have results, both intended and unintended.
What is the purpose of outcome attainment?
a. Answering the question "Were goals achieved?"
b. Clarifying whether agency funds were appropriately expended
c. Determining quantity of care given
d. Measurement of community living outcomes
Asking whether goals were achieved is identical with determining outcomes. Outcome attainment concerns measuring whether planned goals were achieved. Synonyms for this activity are performance evaluation, results of effort, and evaluation of effectiveness.
A nurse is determining the quality of care that is provided. Which of the following factors would the nurse examine?
a. Adequacy and appropriateness
b. Agency mission statements
c. Cost-benefit ratios
How does summative evaluation help the community/public health nurse?
a. Analyzing the data and recognizing gaps
b. Determining long-term effect on health
c. Improving care as it is being delivered
d. Enhancing future offerings of the program
Summative evaluation takes place after the intervention is complete, even as long as months or years later, to determine whether a long-term effect was accomplished.
How does formative evaluation help the community/public health nurse?
a. Analyzing the data and recognizing gaps
b. Determining what to do differently next time
c. Improving care as it is being delivered
d. Enhancing future offerings of the program
Formative evaluation occurs during delivery of care and allows the nurse to modify the care currently being given to improve the outcomes for clients.
A nurse is planning to involve the community in the evaluation process. Why is this a critical part of evaluation?
a. The nurse has completed her ethical, legal, and political responsibilities.
b. The agency retains state approval and national accreditation.
c. The community does not feel ignored by the agency.
d. The interventions helped community members make appropriate lifestyle changes.
Community involvement is crucial to ensure that the interventions were effective for people affected by them.
Stakeholders are defined as persons who
b. Have loaned money to the agency.
c. Helped write the legislation for health care agency funding.
d. Own stock in the agency.
Which of the following groups created the standards for evaluating effective nursing care with communities?
a. The American Association of Colleges of Nursing
b. The American Public Health Association
d. The National Council of State Boards of Nursing
A nurse is planning to examine program outcomes. Which of the following would be the most important question to ask?
a. Was the agency adequately funded?
b. What organizational process was used?
c. What techniques were used?
d. What were the end effects on clients?
Outcomes focus on the end results of the care, such as "Did change occur?" or "What are actual effects on clients?"
A community/public health nurse plans a program to improve the community's ability to prevent accidents. Which of the following measurements would be the best way to evaluate the outcomes of the nurse's intervention?
a. Number of accidents in the subsequent year in comparison with the previous year
b. Number of people who attended the educational program
c. Number of requests for information received after the program
d. Satisfaction level of those who attended the program
The best evaluation is based on outcomes related to the intervention's purpose—in this case, a decrease in accident rate.
A nurse in a particular community decided that the priority was to decrease the number of teenagers who smoke. Which of the following should the nurse measure first?
a. Percentage who currently smoke
b. Attitudes toward smoking
c. Prior experience with smoking cessation
Before the nurse finalizes plans, baseline data on the behavior that is the target of change need to be collected. Although it would be useful to know all of the data mentioned, it is most helpful to know the proportion of teenagers who currently smoke, in order to determine any change. The proportion of the population that engages in smoking can then be compared with the proportion that engages after the intervention.
One of the responsibilities of the community/public health nurse was to teach parenting classes to teenage mothers at high risk for committing child abuse. Which of the following would be an effective approach to helping mothers deal with their infants' behavior without resorting to physical discipline?
a. Asking the mothers to listen carefully to the nurse's suggestions
b. Asking the mothers to develop a contract to use the techniques discussed
d. Asking the mothers to self-report abuse of their infants
Contracts often increase the likelihood that actions will be performed, whereas the other options all have flaws: People other than the nurse may have helpful advice, fear is not the best motivator, and people who are not knowledgeable may not have good ideas, even in a group. Contracts increase commitment to specific actions and therefore increase the likelihood that the appropriate actions will be performed.
A community/public health nurse was told to focus on teenage smoking. Which of the following actions should be the priority of the nurse?
a. Ensuring that smoking is not allowed on school property
b. Establishing community-wide programs on the dangers of smoking
c. Lobbying to pass laws against teenagers' purchase of cigarettes
d. Establishing programs to help adults, especially parents, give up smoking
In most states, it is already illegal for teenagers to purchase cigarettes, and most schools do not allow smoking on school property. Although focusing on parents would be helpful (because children often copy what their parents do), the most important step is to focus attention on the problem throughout the community. Community attitudes predispose the population to support or work against various policies, services, or behaviors.
The nurse wanted to determine the community's level of self-esteem and well-being. Which of the following would be the most effective way to systematically and accurately determine the satisfaction level?
a. Asking every community member, "What is your level of self-esteem?"
c. Distributing self-esteem scales to a random sample of community members
d. Observing the clients currently using certain community-based services
Emotional well-being in a population can be measured by the proportion of members who experience self-esteem and satisfaction with their lives. However, it is not realistic to ask this question of every member of the community. Thus, a random sample surveyed with a tool reliable and valid for an individual should yield an accurate portrayal of the proportion of members who experience positive self-esteem and satisfaction with their lives. This is the best way to get the best assessment of the entire community.
Which of the following personal beliefs best demonstrates the meaning of self-efficacy?
a. "You are capable of continued growth and development."
b. "You are responsible for your own health and well-being."
c. "You can improve your own health and well-being by using imagery."
d. "You can influence your environment and circumstances."
By definition, self-efficacy is the belief that a person can influence his or her environment and circumstances.
The community/public health nurse wanted to most effectively and efficiently determine the health and well-being of the community. Which of the following is the easiest way to determine a community's health?
a. Ask the members of the media who report on the community
b. Examine epidemiologic statistics of morbidity and mortality
c. Review the discharge diagnoses of clients from the community hospital
d. Visit the local grocery stores and exercise programs
The fastest and easiest way to get an overall grasp of the community's health is to examine morbidity and mortality data.
b. Number of single teenage mothers in the local high schools
c. Whether local teenagers are interested in receiving such a service
d. Whether anyone else in the area is offering such a service
Although community/public health nursing interventions may be directed toward establishing new services, the nurse must first be sure that a proposed service is not duplicating services already existing in the community.
Which of the following factors can consumers easily evaluate?
a. Appropriateness of the selected intervention
b. Interpersonal skill of caregivers
c. Quality of the care provided
d. Effectiveness of the program
Consumers can judge such factors as accessibility, waiting time, and cost, although not the intricacies, of the health care given. However, the most crucial factor is the interpersonal relationships of the caregivers with the clients.
a. Appreciating the opportunity to meet the policy makers in the community
b. Clarifying which agenda item was relevant to the agency and its purpose
c. Insisting on dedicating the nurse's time toward giving care, not observing politics
Policies are expressions of goals and rules within a community, an expression of values. Policies can mandate, allow, or initiate actions that affect a community's health. Consequently, it is very valuable to meet policy makers and inform them of perhaps unrecognized health needs in the community.
Which of the following factors has a direct correlation with the health and well-being of the community?
a. The number of hospitals and other health agencies in the community
b. The number of physicians who practice in the community
c. The government funding level of the community
d. The poverty level of the community
Standard of living (level of poverty) is associated with health status.
Which of the following is useful to review in determining whether the goals of the community/public health nurse are appropriate?
a. The assessment of community members' health needs
b. The focus areas for the nation in Healthy People 2020
c. Goals established by other, similar community/public health agencies
d. Goals suggested by the public health research literature
Healthy People 2020 is a guide to health care planning at the federal level, as well as for states and local communities. When the assessment and planning have been performed in partnership with the community, the health care is more likely to be appropriate. Goals are most appropriate when the nurse has assessed health needs of the aggregate, their readiness to change, and the resources available.
A community/public health nurse was not sure the agency was large enough to fulfill some of its goals. Which of the following should the nurse evaluate in order to reach an accurate conclusion?
a. The adequacy of resources, evident in such measures as waiting lists for services
b. The financial base of the agency, evident in the agency budget
c. The number of cooperative physicians, evident in the agency telephone referral list
d. The number of nursing staff, evident in the staffing assignments
The adequacy of resources is a crucial variable; waiting lists are one appropriate measure of how much care is currently needed but not yet received.
To validate change in a population, which of the following should a nurse determine?
a. Whether a high proportion of a random sample report change in their health behaviors
b. Whether a majority of the population confirm changes in their health behaviors
c. Whether each person the nurse individually taught reports a change in health behaviors
d. Whether each staff nurse reports that their assigned families demonstrated a change in health behaviors
A community/public health nurse wanted to use normative-referenced evaluation to determine the effectiveness of an environmental pollution program in the community. After examining the number of asthma-related admissions at the local children's hospital, which of the following actions should the nurse take?
a. Compare the admission levels attributable to asthma before and after the implementation.
b. Compare the admission levels attributable to asthma with the admission levels attributable to accidents.
c. Determine whether the admissions were attributable to asthma or other respiratory problems.
d. Determine whether there were zero admissions because of the decreased incidence of asthma after the intervention.
A zero rate is unrealistic because asthma may have multiple causes; removing one cause might decrease the incidence, but not to zero. In normative-referenced evaluation, measuring goal achievement may involve comparing the population in question with another population. An appropriate approach then would be comparing the population with itself before and after implementation
Which of the following is an example of a criterion-referenced evaluation?
a. Comparing the population with regard to the factor of interest before and after the intervention
b. Comparing the population with another population with regard to the factor of interest
c. Determining whether the objective is appropriate for the program
d. Determining whether the objective was reached at the desired level
In criterion-referenced evaluation, an investigator measures the extent to which objectives are reached. Comparing the population with regard to various factors is an example of normative-referenced evaluation. Determining the appropriateness of the objective does not match the definition of criterion- or normative-referenced evaluation; rather, it addresses specific program evaluation.
A community/public health nurse tried to keep the community informed of the progress of the new health programs at all the meetings that the nurse attended. Which of the following would be the reason for the nurse's ongoing communication?
a. To avoid community dissatisfaction when expectations are not met
b. To be sure that no one blames the nurse when unexpected happenings occur
c. To fulfill the responsibility of keeping the community informed
d. To be politically and culturally sensitive to the needs of the community
The more the community/public health nurse is aware of stakeholders' expectations, the fewer surprises there will be later. Dissatisfaction occurs most frequently when expectations are not met. Continued communication allows early identification of misunderstandings, negotiation, and revision of the program to balance the interests of most of the stakeholders. It is not possible to satisfy everyone.
Why is documentation of evaluation so crucial?
a. It helps explain why nurses have limited time to provide direct client care.
b. It helps keep administrators informed of what the staff is doing before staff evaluation time.
c. It helps the nurse better understand the evaluation and the findings.
d. It helps provide a baseline against which to study trends and make program decisions.
Among other reasons, documentation is necessary to provide a baseline from which to detect changes in outcomes. Such documentation also provides a basis for deciding whether programs should be continued and how they might be modified.
What needs to be done when evaluation data are analyzed?
a. Interpreting and judging the data before making any recommendations
b. Examining data through the approach that has commonly been used by the agency
c. Reviewing the literature and comparing it with current findings
d. Using the Omaha System as the guiding framework
Facts do not speak for themselves but must always be interpreted in context for meaning. Therefore, data used for evaluation must also be interpreted for meaning, and the desirability of the outcomes must be judged. The other responses are not appropriate for use in evaluating data.
Which of the following is the typical research design used for evaluation in a community/public health agency?
a. Analysis of variance
b. Multiple regression analysis
c. Time series design or other quasi-experimental method
d. True experiment with randomization and control
Time series design is very useful because it allows pretest and posttest results to be compared in order to demonstrate that change did (or did not) occur. Later evaluations indicate whether the change was lasting. Because nurses cannot manipulate variables or use control groups, only quasi-experimental methods, not random clinical trials, can be used.
Which of the following descriptions characterizes a problem with the use of case descriptions as an evaluation method?
b. They have to be repeated in order to verify that no other factor could have changed the outcomes.
c. They are not considered "good" research.
d. They cannot prove that the nursing intervention led to the specific health outcomes.
Which of the following questions is answered by completing a cost-benefit analysis?
a. Can similar outcomes be achieved with less cost?
b. Can unlicensed assistive personnel give care equally rapidly?
c. Was the care appropriate and given correctly?
d. Was the nurse as efficient and as skilled as possible?
Cost-effective measures determine the cost per unit of outcome, which helps establish conclusions as to whether similar outcomes can be achieved with less cost. Therefore, the question that is being asked is "Can similar outcomes be achieved with less cost?"
Which of the following activities represents a challenge when a cost-benefit analysis is performed?
a. Calculating all of the indirect, less visible costs
b. Placing an appropriate dollar value on the benefits
c. Using computer software to calculate the results
d. Controlling the variables of cost and benefit
Why is the perspective of third-party payers and administrators an issue when cost-benefit analysis is performed?
a. Administrators do not focus equally on costs and benefits.
b. Administrators are not experts in cost-benefit analyses.
c. Administrators lack understanding of health care benefits used in such analyses.
d. Administrators ignore the client perspective of time, energy, and money.
The perspective is that of the provider or the payer, not that of the client. Client time, energy, and money are typically not considered in the cost-benefit analysis. This oversight is an issue because what might be least expensive for an agency can be extremely expensive for a family.

Users and IT
Free Access
# Influences of demographic characteristics of community network users on their perceptions and use of the network
Nahyun Kwon
- [nkwon@ wisc.edu](mailto:nkwon@ wisc.edu "Link to email address")
School of Library and Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 4256 H. C. White Hall, 600 N. Park Street, Madison, WI 53706
Nahyun Kwon
- [nkwon@ wisc.edu](mailto:nkwon@ wisc.edu "Link to email address")
School of Library and Information Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 4256 H. C. White Hall, 600 N. Park Street, Madison, WI 53706
First published: 31 January 2005
## Abstract
## Introduction
Despite the fact that the above studies addressed the importance of psychological variables, the common critical problem of those studies is that their findings are not grounded on a systematic sampling. Their conclusions were derived from anecdotal evidence. The problems identified in the previous literature are summarized as follows:
Lack of representativeness of samples studied,
Absence of updated information on user demographic profiles, which prevents us from assessing the effectiveness of community network service delivery to traditionally underserved populations,
Lack of research on demographic characteristics in association with other predictors of use, such as user perceptions and attitudes.
The above problems signaled the need for a new approach to examining demographic variables: a systematically sampled study that takes a comprehensive approach in which psychological variables are simultaneously considered along with demographic variables. Such an approach will enhance our understanding of community network user demography and its impact on use. The following specific research questions were investigated in the present study.
### Research Questions
The following two research questions were derived from the literature review:
- **RQ1.** What is the current demographic profile of community network users? Has the earlier demography of typical community network users - educated young males with higher incomes - been changed after the numerous federal and local efforts to bridge the digital gap between Internet haves and have-nots?
- **RQ2.** Are demographic variables strong predictors of community network use? When demographic variables and psychological variables are simultaneously considered in their influence on use, are demographic variables still strong predictors of community network use?
### Selected Psychological Variables for the Study
### Research Propositions and Hypotheses
The following two predictions were made based on the literature review:
Once all the psychological variables are taken into account, the direct influence of all the demographic variables on use will disappear.
**Figure 1**
Conceptual Framework
The first four hypotheses tested the relationships between demographic variables and use.
- Hypothesis 1: Gender will predict the level of community network use. Males are likely to use a community network more than females.
- Hypothesis 2: Age will predict the level of community network use. Younger people are likely to use a community network more than older people.
- Hypothesis 3: Educational attainment will predict the level of community network use. The more educated people are likely to use a community network more than the less educated people.
- Hypothesis 4: Household income will predict the level of community network use. The more affluent people are likely to use a community network more than the less affluent people.
- The following four hypotheses tested changes in the relationship between demographic variables and use after taking into account psychological variables.
- Hypothesis 5: The positive relationship between male and use will change as all psychological variables and other demographic variables are controlled for.
- Hypothesis 6: The negative relationship between age and use will change as all psychological variables and other demographic variables are controlled for.
- Hypothesis 7: The positive relationship between education and use will change as all psychological variables and other demographic variables are controlled for.
- Hypothesis 8: The positive relationship between income and use will change as all psychological variables and other demographic variables are controlled for.
## Methodology
### Study Site Selection
In surveying community network users, the current study restricted its study site to a single geographically-defined community network. This decision was based on the difficulty of controlling the known and unknown extraneous variables, such as computer and networking resources, staff expertise, and organizational structures, of different community networks. The following three criteria were employed in selecting a community network to serve as a desirable study site.
A community network with the generic goals of community networks, which are equality of access, community building, and empowering local residents through information and communication technology;
A community network showing active use of a variety of service features: This criterion was based on the consideration that the study site should provide actively used diverse services in order to ensure the variability of the research variables.
. This community network has received national recognition, as evidenced in its being awarded numerous grants from different sources.
All these characteristics identified the study site as one of the most successfully operated generic community networks in the U.S. and as a site meeting the three criteria for site selection.
### Survey Research Method and Design
The current study employed survey research methods that have widely used in studies of information technology and media use. Most of the research variables in this study were measured essentially at one point in time, using a cross-sectional design. However, a panel study design with repeated measures was employed to measure the ultimate dependent variable, Use. This design was used to alleviate the intrinsic inability of a cross-sectional design to establish causal relationships.
### Study Population, Sampling, and Data Collection Procedure
The target population of this study was people eighteen years old or over who either have made use of or are aware of the community network studied. The population consisted of two groups of people. The first group comprised current active members and previously registered members. In contrast to this identifiable first group, the second group consisted of unidentifiable users, who utilized the services through either public access terminals or the Website of the community network.
### Data Collection Instrument and Measurement Operationalizations
For this study, a systematically structured self-administered questionnaire was developed as a data collection instrument. Each demographic variable was measured with a single-item question. Both psychological variables and Use were measured with Likert-type multiple-item scales using self-reports. A summary of operationalizations of the following research variables is listed with their reliability test scores in the Appendix.
- _Community Network Use_: Ultimate Dependent Variable (RQ2)
- _Demographic Variables_ (Gender, Age, Education, and Income): Descriptive Statistics (RQ1) and Independent Variables (RQ2)
- _Psychological Variables_ (Attitude, Subjective Norms, Perceived Control of Use, and Sense of Community): Independent Variable (RQ2)
- _Multiple ISP Use_: Control Variable (RQ2)
The operationalization of community network use (Use) is detailed below due to its importance as the ultimate dependent variable. Use was measured with two questionnaire items.
Standardized scores of the responses from the two items were averaged to compute the score for community network use, that is, the standardized level of use.
## Findings
417 completed survey responses were used for data anlysis: 396 responses from the mail survey, 6 responses from public access sites, and 15 web survey responses. Although the study was designed to obtain a representative sample from all possible sampling sources, the collected data produced few cases from the latter two sources. The first 30 and last 30 responses were compared for their differences over research variables using t-tests. The test results showed no difference between the two groups across all research variables, indicating sample representativeness and a lack of non-response bias (α = .05). The response rate of the mail survey was 42.2% (including the 26 incomplete returns) and was considered to be more than an acceptable response rate for survey research conducted on a general population in a social setting.
A predominantly large number of responses came from registered users, and the number of participants from both web survey and public access sites was not large enough to allow for systematic comparisons across the three different sampling sources. Thus, the completed questionnaires from all three sources were combined for data analysis. The 21 responses from the latter two sampling sources were included in the analysis since they still reflected diverse user characteristics and use patterns and therefore could increase the variability of the measurements.
### Community Network Users' Demographic Profile (RQ 1)
|  | Mean | Std.Dev. | Min | Max | Valid N |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Age | 49.34 | 13.80 | 18 | 83 | 407 |
| Length of Experience (Total number of months using Community Network) | 45.23 | 26.50 | 0 | 90 | 397 |
| Total number of minutes of use in the past week | 242.81 | 236.78 | 0 | 1,200 | 402 |
The numbers indicate that 55% of respondents were female, the mean highest educational attainment was “Graduated 4-year college”, annual household income ranged between $30,000 and $49,999, and 56% of respondents used multiple ISPs.
The standard deviation is not reported for the categorical variables that used dummy coding: Gender and Multiple ISP Use.
The average age of the study sample (49.3 years old) was considerably older than the median age of local residents (28.6 years old) and the mean age of general Internet users (35.7 years old). Noticeably, the percentage of older age groups in the sample was higher than in either of the other comparison groups.
In the case of education, the community network users showed a higher educational attainment than the general population. More college graduates were found among community network users (76.0%) than among local residents (41.3%) or among GVU WWW users (59.3%). The considerably higher percentage of educational attainment shown in the current study might be attributed to the study site being a University town, where graduate level education is more common than in non-University towns in the United States.
The above comparisons of demographic characteristics indicate that there were some unique characteristics in the study sample. A gender inequality was not identified in the study sample. The percentages of older users (over 45 years old of age) and of those with a college degree or higher level of education were considerably higher. While the income level among the study sample was normally distributed, the study sample was a little more affluent than local residents, although the study sample included a greater percentage of the lower income population than general Internet users.
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Age | Mean | Mean:49.3 | Median: 28.6 | Mean: 35.7 |  |
|  | – | 25–34 years old | 10.9% | 14.7% (20.6%) |  | 20.2% (23.8%) |
|  | – | 35–44 years old | 21.8% | 13.5%(18.9%) |  | 21.8%(25.7%) |
|  | – | 45–54 years old | 30.7% | 11.4%(15.9%) |  | 18.6%(22.0%) |
|  | – | 55–64 years old | 16.0% | 6.6%(9.2%) |  | 9.6%(11.2%) |
|  | – | 65 years or older | 18.2% | 9.8%(13.7%) |  | 5.9%(7.0%) |
| Education | – | Attended High School | 2.2% | 12.5% | 1.3% |  |
|  | – | Graduated high school | 7.4% | 26.27% | 6.9% |  |
|  | – | Attended some college | 13.9% | 9.93% | 28.5% |  |
|  | – | Graduated college | 26.6% | 23.54% | 33.9% |  |
|  | – | Attended or completed graduate school | 49.4% | 17.76% | 25.4% |  |
| Income | Mean | Mean: 30–50k | Med: $26k | Mean: $53k |  |
|  | – | Under 15,000 | 10.6% | 28.0% |  |  |
|  | – | $15,000 – $29,999 | 15.8% | 19.4% | 14.8% |  |
|  | – | $30,000 – $49,999 | 21.8% | 33.6% | 22.7% |  |
|  | – | $50,000 – $74,999 | 20.4% | 12.8% | 21.0% |  |
|  | – | $75,000 – $99,999 | 7.9% | 3.4% | 11.8% |  |
|  | – | $100,000 – $149,999 | 12.9% | 2.0% | 12.4% |  |
|  | – | $150,000 or over | 1.2% | 1.0% |  |  |
|  | – | No response | 9.4% |  | 17.3% |  |
While data on both gender and age are from Census 2000, data on education and income are from Census 1990 (pop: 173,025), due to the unavailability of year 2000 data (pop: 179,669).
The numbers in parentheses represent the adjusted percentage, which included only members of the population of 18 years old or above. The percentage of the population 18 years old or above was 71.5% of all local residents.
The numbers in parentheses represent the adjusted percentage, which included only members of the population 19 years old or above. The percentage of the population 19 years old or above was 84.9% of all local residents. The age ranges of this study are 19–25; 26–35; 36–45; 46–55; 56–65; and over 65.
The proportion of female respondents was not provided due to the different calculation method. The study reported that 74.3% of male respondents and 70.7% of female respondents were Internet users in this national random telephone survey.
These comparisons evidently showed that the demography of community network users is not a sub-sample of the local population or the general Internet service users but has its own specific characteristics.
### The Level of Community Network Use (Use)
**Figure 2**
Frequency of community network Use
### Influence of Demographic Variables on Use: Hypothesis Tests (RQ 2)
The first four research hypotheses were tested for the influences of each of the four demographic variables on community network use. Multiple regression was used as the statistical analytic technique. All four demographic variables were simultaneously regressed on use controlling for Multiple ISP Use, the control variable, to eliminate its unwanted compounding influence on use.
|  |  | Unstandardized Regression Coefficients (B) | Std. Error | Standardized Regression Coefficients (β) | t | Prob.(p) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Hypothesis 1 | Gender (X1) | −.135 | .122 | −.076 | −1.105 | .270 |
| Hypothesis 2 | Age (X2) | .005 | .004 | .072 | 1.042 | .299 |
| Hypothesis 3 | Education (X3) | −.019 | .037 | −.039 | −.517 | .606 |
| Hypothesis 4 | Income (X4) | −.016 | .043 | −.029 | −.382 | .703 |
|  |  | Unstandardized Regression Coefficients (B) | Std. Error | Standardized Regression Coefficients (β) | t | Prob.(p) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | PBC (X6) | −.032 | .039 | −.061 | −.819 | .414 |
|  | SN (X7) | .029 | .036 | .057 | .817 | .415 |
|  | SOC (X8) | −.041 | .046 | −.061 | −.890 | .374 |
| Hypothesis 5 | Gender (X1) | −.175 | .122 | −.098 | −1.433 | .153 |
| Hypothesis 6 | Age (X2) | −.001 | .005 | −.012 | −.173 | .863 |
| Hypothesis 7 | Education (X3) | −.027 | .035 | −.056 | −.769 | .443 |
| Hypothesis 8 | Income (X4) | .006 | .041 | .011 | .147 | .883 |
- \\*\\*\\*
p < 0.01; \* p < 0.05; + p < 0.1
## Discussions and Suggestions for Future Study
In relation to the influence of psychological variables on use, the current study also empirically supported earlier anecdotal reports that psychological variables might be a stronger predictor of use than demographic variables. It was found that attitude (A) is a strong predictor of use. Neither normative influence (SN), controllability (PBC), nor sense of community (SOC), however, was found to be a significant predictor of community network use in the current study. Further research might be conducted to explain the lack of influence of these three psychological variables.
Although demographic variables were not found to be predictors of use, this fact does not eliminate the possibility of either their influence on user perception of community network use or their indirect influences on use. Perception of technology use or normative values of community-based technology service could be associated with users' demographic characteristics. Although these possibilities were not rigorously tested through hypotheses, the data collected in this study indicated such possibilities. For example, both females and older users seemed to have lower perceptions of control in using the community network, while they were more influenced by social norms.
Based on the current study results, researchers could further investigate (1) associations between demographic characteristics and people's psychological tendencies, and (2) the influence of those associations on use. One way to conceptualize a new study would be to position all the research variables in a structural path model and adopt a more powerful statistical technique. For example, an analytic technique, such as Structural Equation Modeling (SEM), would be able to differentiate the direct and indirect influence of demographic variables on use in the structural path model. Another way to investigate the issue would be to treat the demographic variables as moderators, rather than antecedents, in order to identify interactions between demographic and psychological variables.
## Appendix: APPENDIX. Summary of Variables with Reliability Test Scores
| Latent Variable | Observed Variable | Questionnaire Wording | Cronbach's alpha (a) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Control Variable | Multiple ISP Use | Do you currently use an Internet Service Provider (ISP) other than \[name of community network\]? | – |
| Demographic variables | Gender | What is your gender? | – |
| Age | What was your age on your last birthday? | – |
| Education | What is the highest level of education you have completed? | – |
| Income | What was the range of your total family income last year? | – |
| Experience | Exp\_yT | How long have you been using (or did you use) \[name of community network\] if you have used it before? | – |
| A2 | When it comes to your use, is using \[name of community network\] unpleasant or pleasant? |
| A3 | When it comes to your use, do you dislike or like the idea of using \[name of community network\]? |
| Perceived Control of Use (PBC) | PBC1 | I am certainly able to use all the \[name of community network\] features I may want to use. | .8855 |
| PBC2 | Successful use of \[name of community network\] is entirely within my capabilities. |
| PBC3 | I have the resources, the knowledge, and the skills to make good use of \[name of community network\]. |
| PBC4 | There are some things in \[name of community network\] that I cannot control and they sometimes make my use of \[name of community network\] difficult. |
| Subjective Norms (SN) | SN1 | My use of \[name of community network\] is/was influenced by the people (or social groups) who influence my decisions in general. | .7071 |
| SN2 | My use of \[name of community network\] is/was influenced by people (or social groups) who are important to me. |
| SN3 | Most people in my everyday life would tend to encourage my use of \[name of community network\]. |
| Sense of Community (SOC) | SOC1 | Do you like the city/town you live in? | .9325 |
| SOC2 | Do you like the people in your city/town? |
| SOC3 | Do you feel like you belong to your city/town? |
| SOC4 | In general, do you feel a sense of community with others in your city or town? |
| Intention to Use | Intent1 | During the next six months, I will be using \[name of community network\] as one of my Internet Service Providers (ISP). | .7709 |
| Intent2 | During the next six months, I will be using \[name of community network\] as a source to look for community information. |
| Intent3 | During the next six months, I will be using \[name of community network\] for more hours than I did in the past six months. |
| Intent4 | During the next six months, I will be using \[name of community network\] |
| Community Network Use | Use1 | How often did you use \[name of community network\] during the past 30 days? | .7241 |
| Use2 | How many hours in total did you use \[name of community network\] in the past week? \[Count only the hours you were actively involved in using it.\] |
## References
- Adam, D. A.,
Nelson, R. R., &
Todd, P. A.
Perceived usefulness, ease of use, and usage of information technology: A replication.
_MIS Quarterly_,
16, 227–247.
10.2307/249577
- Adams, Paul T.
Final project report: TIIAP project evaluation report.
University of Illinois, Graduate School of Library and Information Science. (NTIA TIIAP Grant Award No. 17-60-97026).
- Ajzen, I.
From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior.
In J. Kuhl &
J. Beckmann (Eds.),
Action control, from cognition to behavior.
(pp. 11–39).
New York: Springer-Verlag.
10.1007/978-3-642-69746-3\_2
- Ajzen, I.
The theory of planned behavior.
_Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes_,
50, 179–211.
10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T
- Ajzen, I., &
Fishbein, M.
Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior.
Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall.
10.1037/019251
- Beamish, A.
Communities on-line: community-based computer networks.
Unpublished master's thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
- Beinhoff, L. A.
The personal computer – a medium with a different message for every user: An investigation into the applicability of mass communications theories to personal computers. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Syracuse University.
- Blair, E., &
Cognitive processes used by survey respondents to answer behavioral frequency questions.
_Journal of Consumer Research_,
14, 280–288.
10.1086/209112
- Bollen, K. A.
Strctural equations with latent variables.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
10.1002/9781118619179
- Chavis, D. M., &
Wandersman, A.
Sense of community in the urban environment: A catalyst for participation and community development.
_American Journal of Community Psychology_,
10.1007/BF00922689
- Cisler, S.
Community Computer Networks: Building Electronic Greenbelts.
In A. Bishop (Ed.),
What does your community need? Measuring community information needs and outcomes. Report.
(pp. 16–31).
Champaign-Urbana, IL: University of Illinois, Graduate School of Library and Information Science.
- Cohen, J., &
Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
- Davis, F. D.,
Bagozzi, R. P., &
Warshaw, P. R.
User acceptance of computer technology: A comparison of two theoretical models.
_Management Science_,
35, 982–1003.
10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982
- DeVellis, R. F.
Scale development: Theory and applications.
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
- Dillman, D.
Mail and Internet surveys: The Tailored Design Method.
New York: John Wiley & Son.
- Dillon, A., &
User acceptance of information: Theories and models.
_Annual Review of Information Science and Technology_,
- Dixon, J. M.
Uses and gratifications theory to predict senior's use of an electronic community. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of San Francisco.
- Fishbein, M., &
Belief, attitude, intention and behavior: An introduction to theory and research.
Reading, MA. Addison-Wesley.
- Fisher, Y.
The Seattle Community Network and its effect on community cohesion.
Unpublished master's thesis. University of North Dakota.
- Georgia Institute of Technology
- Gore, A. Jr.
Prepared Remarks by Vice President Al Gore to the Center for Communication.
- Guy, N. K.
Community networks: building real communities in a virtual space?
Unpublished master's thesis. Simon Fraser University.
- Hoag, A. M.
Speed and the Internet: factors influencing choice of access capacity and subsequent effects on media consumption.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Michigan State University.
- Johnson, R. A.
Developing an object-oriented systems development acceptance model.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Arkansas.
- Kavanaugh, A. L.,
Cohill, A. M., &
Patterson, S.
- Lin, C. A.
Online-service adoption likelihood,
_Journal of Advertising Research_,
- Morris, M. G.
A longitudinal examination of information technology acceptance: The influence of system experience on user perceptions and behavior.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Indiana University.
- National Telecommunications and Information Administration. U. S. Department of Commerce
- Newby, G., &
Community system users and uses.
_ASIS Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting_,
33, 118–126.
- Newhagen, J. E., &
Rafaeli, S.
Why communication researchers should study the Internet: a dialogue.
_Journal of Communication_,
10.1111/j.1460-2466.1996.tb01458.x
- Newton, R. R., &
Rudestam, K. E.
Your statistical consultant: answers to your data analysis questions.
Thousand Oaks, CA. Sage.
- Niedermayer, D.
- Nielsen Media Research
- Patrick, A. S.,
Black, A., &
Rich, young, male, dissatisfied computer geeks? Demographics and satisfaction from the National Capital FreeNet.
- Patrick, A. S. and
Whalen, T. E.
- Perse, E. M., &
Dunn, D. G.
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Communication Theory and Methodology Division of the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication. August 1995. Washington, D. C.
- Rogers, E. M.
Diffusion of innovations
( 3rd ed.).
New York. The Free Press.
- Schuler, D.
New community networks: wired for change.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
- Thompsen, P. A.
Toward a public lane on the information superhighway: A media performance analysis of the community-wide education and information service initiative.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Utah.
- University of California Los Angels. Center for Communication Policy (2001).
This problem was identified in a community network that was pilot studied.
It is almost impossible to accurately estimate the number of users per day. In a rough comparison of activity, the number of average daily hits at this community network was estimated to be over 100 times greater than the hits received by another pilotstudied community network, which was also a well-known community network in the U.S.
These statistics were obtained from an interview with the director of the community network
## Citing Literature
November 2002
Pages 326-337
### Metrics
Citations: 1
### Details
### Publication History
- Issue Online: 31 January 2005
- Version of Record online: 31 January 2005
Teaser Component
Thanks for sharing!
Find any service
Close crossmark popup

# Understanding the 2024 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates
# Understanding the 2024 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates
September 11, 2025
Written by:
Stacy Gimbel Vidal, Public Information Office; Eric Jensen, senior advisor for population estimates and coverage measurement, Population Division; Jonathan Eggleston, senior economist, Center for Economic Studies; Edward Castro, chief, American Community Survey Estimation Branch
_Estimated reading time: 9 minutes_
Each year, the U.S. Census Bureau conducts the American Community Survey (ACS), providing a detailed portrait of our nation and communities.
Not everyone receives the ACS, though. It just goes to a sample — or randomly selected portion — of addresses each month. The responses are combined to paint the statistical portrait.
What that portrait looks like each year is ultimately affected by:
- Who is in the sample.
- Who responds.
- How many people each respondent represents.
This blog discusses how these elements come into play in the 2024 ACS 1-year estimates and how they may contribute to differences observed in some estimates compared to prior years.
For example, every year the survey uses “population controls” to align the ACS estimates with official population estimates. The 2024 population estimates for the overall population and certain subpopulations significantly increased after we improved a key component of the estimates. This increase is reflected in the ACS survey estimates, too, and interacted with other methodological elements discussed in this blog, which contributed to year-to-year change in the ACS results.
### Who is in the Sample
We strive to draw a sample that can be used to represent the whole population. The estimates derived from the sample need to reflect the entire population as accurately as possible.
You can get a sense of how close we’re getting to the true value for the overall population by looking at the margin of error published next to each estimate.
For example, if an estimate is 200 and the margin of error is ± 10, that means there’s a 90% probability that the true value for the population is within 200 ± 10. In other words, we’re 90% confident it’s between 190 and 210.
We encourage data users to be mindful of the margins of error when focusing on any particular estimate. The margin of error is the key to understanding the degree of uncertainty in the estimate.
### Who Responds
We ask households selected in the sample to respond to the ACS online or by mail (and we send reminders). If they don’t respond, we send field representatives to a sample of the nonresponding households to try to gather their responses in person or by phone. This follow-up operation is called Computer-Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI).
One way the ACS controls costs of data collection is by identifying households to stop interviewing in person or by phone. In 2024, we improved our method to have a limited, data-driven approach to stopping cases:
- For the first two weeks of the CAPI operation, we attempt to interview every household in the CAPI sample to ensure each housing unit has an opportunity to respond.
- During the operation’s final two weeks, we prioritize the remaining cases, focusing our resources on collecting data from sampled housing units that, based on administrative data, are less represented among those who have already responded.
- The remaining cases are still eligible to respond online or via the paper questionnaire, and a small portion do.
Along the way, one of the things we evaluate is whether the people who respond have different characteristics from those who don’t. For example, if only retired individuals respond, then statistics on labor force participation would not be accurate because they would not be factoring in households with people who are working.
This concept is called “nonresponse bias” because it can bias the estimates if there are major differences between the two groups.
To evaluate nonresponse bias for the ACS, we look at administrative data for households in the sample (when available) and compare how certain characteristics of the people who responded might be different from those who didn’t.
### Representing Others
To figure out how many people each respondent should represent, we develop weights based on the sample design, response and nonresponse, and the population and housing unit controls.
The controls are independent estimates of:
- Hispanic origin.
- Total number of housing units.
These characteristics within the ACS sample can differ from known population levels because of sampling variability and differences between people who respond and those who don’t.
The improved methodology more accurately reflects the net increase in migrants to the United States between 2022 and 2024. As a result, there was a cumulative increase of 5.196 million people for the 2024 ACS 1-year estimates. Using these updated controls helps us improve the overall accuracy of the ACS estimates.
The increase in net international migration is reflected in the 2024 ACS 1-year count estimates of people across topics. This will be especially apparent when comparing to prior ACS years.
- For example, in our ACS comparison profile table on economic characteristics (Table CP03), you might notice that the civilian labor force increased by nearly 4 million people.
- Some of this increase might capture changing economic conditions over time, but it may also reflect the large year-to-year population increase due to both demographic changes and updates to the methodology.
The population increase may also be impacting estimates beyond just population counts.
- A good example would be the average household size, which is a function of both population size and the number of occupied housing units.
- When looking at the comparison profile for housing characteristics (Table CP04), you might notice an increase in average household size for your state, county or place this year — despite the decreasing trend over the past few years.
When looking at counts of people across the ACS tables, especially when comparing to 2023, it is important to consider the increase in population because of the higher level of net international migration. While this new population total for 2024 uses an improved methodology and more accurately reflects the total U.S. population, we encourage users to take this increase into consideration when comparing subpopulations over time.
Also, keep in mind that the ACS is designed to measure characteristic distributions. Whenever possible, we generally recommend comparing population characteristics such as percentages, means, medians, and rates rather than estimates of population totals.
### Quality Checks
We analyze the data by comparing it against past benchmarks to identify outliers or unexpected results that need to be further examined. We triple-check data collection and processing, analyze the sample and the potential for nonresponse bias, and verify the weighting process.
As we do with all our data products, we’ve investigated unexpected differences in the 2024 estimates and determined that they are not due to data collection or processing errors.
As usual, we encourage data users to be mindful of margins of error published alongside the ACS estimates. The margins of error provide information on the uncertainty embedded in the estimates related to sampling variability and should guide how you use the estimates.
We also encourage data users to be mindful of the potential interplay of the other factors discussed in this blog, as they may contribute to unexpected differences in the estimates compared with recent years.
### Conclusion
In summary, the 2024 ACS 1-year estimates will reflect:
- Changes in the population.
- Who is in the survey’s sample.
- Who responds and how they’re different from those who don’t.
- The weighting methodology, or how many people each response represents.
- Changes in the population controls, particularly the methodological improvements to better reflect the large net increase in immigrants and total population.
This article was filed under:
[Previous\\
Page Last Revised - September 10, 2025

Chapter 2. \| Section 9.
# Section 9. Community Readiness
| Learn how to select strategies based on the community’s readiness to take action on the issue. |
## What is community readiness?
**Community readiness is the degree to which a community is ready to take action on an issue.** That readiness can range from none at all (the community has never even heard of the issue in question – think of AIDS in 1982) to already having successful programs in place and making headway. Community readiness has some specific characteristics that are important for community builders to understand:
- _Community readiness is issue-specific._ A community can be more than ready to address one issue, while being at the very earliest stages of readiness in relation to another. It’s measurable. It’s measurable across multiple dimensions. Not only can you get an accurate assessment of community readiness, you can accurately measure where the community is on various elements of readiness. (We’ll discuss the dimensions of community readiness in the next part of this section.)
- _Community readiness can vary across different segments of the community._ Some groups – those directly affected by the issue, for example – may be far more ready to deal with it than others. However, as we’ll see, there are some ways to help move communities toward higher levels of readiness.
- _Understanding community readiness is essential knowledge for addressing an issue._ You can easily doom an effort by trying to push a community into something it’s not ready for. People will only support what they see as reasonable, logical, and doable. You may be proposing something that’s all of those, but if the community’s perception is otherwise, the effort is unlikely to be successful.
An understanding of community readiness allows you to tailor an intervention or strategy to what the community is willing to accept and support. By taking small steps forward – by setting goals that necessitate a stretch for people, but not so great a stretch as to be beyond their current ability and understanding of the issue – you can make steady progress.
## What is the community readiness model?
### Dimensions of community readiness
Dimensions of readiness are key factors that influence your community’s preparedness to take action on an issue.  Six dimensions identified by the model are:
- **Community efforts** _._ To what extent are there existing efforts, programs, and policies that address the issue?
- **Leadership** _._ To what extent are appointed leaders and influential community members supportive of the issue?
- **Community Climate** _._ What is the prevailing attitude of the community toward the issue?  Is it one of helplessness or one of responsibility and empowerment?
- **Resources related to the issue** _._ To what extent are local resources – people, time, money, space, etc. – available to support efforts?
Your community’s status with respect to each of the dimensions forms the basis of the overall level of community readiness. Remember that readiness can vary – sometimes widely – across dimensions, so that, for example, levels of community efforts and resources may be very different. The levels of readiness describe just how prepared your community is to tackle the issue in question.  The community’s level for the issue you’re concerned with doesn’t necessarily correspond to its level on other issues (remember that community readiness is issue-specific).
### Community readiness can be described by nine different levels:
- **No awareness** _._ The issue is not generally recognized by the community or leaders as a problem.
- **Denial/ resistance** _._ At least some community members recognize that it is a concern, but there is little recognition that it might be occurring locally.
- **Preplanning.** There is clear recognition that something must be done, and there may even be a group addressing it. However, efforts are not focused or detailed.
- **Preparation.** Active leaders begin planning in earnest. The community offers modest support of their efforts.
- **Initiation.** Enough information is available to justify efforts. Activities are underway.
- **Stabilization.** Activities are supported by administrators or community decision-makers. Staff are trained and experienced.
- **Confirmation/ expansion** _._ Efforts are in place. Community members feel comfortable using services, and they support expansions. Local data are regularly obtained.
Once you know your community’s level of readiness, you can plan your effort to start at that level and move the community to the next, and to continue to move the community, one level at a time.
## Why use the community readiness model?
- **It conserves valuable resources (time, money, people) by guiding the selection of strategies that are most likely to be successful** _._ Rather than spinning your wheels trying to get the community to do something it’s not ready for, you – and the community – can get up to speed quickly by starting in the right place.
- **It is an efficient, inexpensive, and easy-to-use tool** _._ It doesn’t take professional expertise to administer or score, it’s free, and it works.
- **It promotes community recognition and ownership of the issue.** Because it can be used by community members, and because it recognizes the needs and assumptions of the community, the model makes it easier for community members to see the issue and understand its effects.
- **Because of strong community ownership, it helps to assure that strategies are culturally congruent and sustainable** _._
- **The process of community change can be complex and challenging, but the model breaks down the process into a series of manageable steps** _._ Moving from no readiness to the highest level is a long step.  Moving from the lowest level to the next one up is manageable and easy to understand.
- **It creates a community vision for healthy change** _._ The levels of readiness mirror the levels of community competency, and describe, to some extent, how a healthy community handles issues.
## When should you use the community readiness model?
The nature of the model makes it useful in virtually any situation where an issue needs to be addressed, but there are some times when it can be particularly useful.
- **In the course of an ongoing effort.** If your effort is successful, the community will be moving forward, not only in dealing with the issue, but in readiness.  In order to make sure that it continues to work on tasks and goals that most members can accept and accomplish – and to move forward – it’s important to monitor readiness, and adjust your strategy accordingly.
- **Each time you tackle a new issue** _._ Because community readiness is issue-specific, it’s important to know where the community falls on each issue you address.  Successful work on one issue may leave the community better prepared and more willing to address others, or it may leave community members complacent, and feeling that there’s not much more to be done.  In either case, a campaign will have to respond to where the community is currently.
- **When several different communities, or different segments of the community, are involved.** As we’ve discussed, groups within the community may be in very different places on the readiness scale. You may need a unique strategy for each in order to mount a successful effort.
- **When you’re planning an effort that involves a participatory process** _._ What level of participation can you expect to begin with?  Where do you have to start in order to have a reasonable possibility of success? Applying the model will help to answer these and similar questions.
- **When you’re engaged in a community or neighborhood planning effort** _._ Many such efforts start with the assumption that everyone is at the same readiness level, but provide very little encouragement to move. A close look at where the community or neighborhood is actually starting from might both speed up the process and broaden involvement and subsequent satisfaction with the results.
## Who should be involved in using the community readiness model?
In any use of the model, there are really two groups of people whose involvement is crucial: those who should apply and administer the model and assessment, and those who should be surveyed when the assessment is conducted.
- **Who should consider using the model and/or administering the assessment**?
- Anyone else interested in community or social change. Simply understanding the concept may prove valuable in any community work that citizens engage in.
- **Who should be surveyed when the model is being applied**? To some extent, the answer to this question depends on the nature of the issue. If it concerns youth, for instance (youth violence, teen pregnancy), youth should be among those consulted. Likewise for other groups – seniors living alone, Latinos, people with particular medical conditions, etc. Some general possibilities, with the character of the community in mind:
- Schools/Universities
- Municipal/county/tribal government
- Law enforcement
- Health & medical professions
- Social services
- Mental health & treatment services
- Clergy or spiritual community
- Community at large
- People on limited fixed incomes (Social Security, disability, etc.)
## How do you use the community readiness model?
**The model relies on the Community Readiness Assessment**.
> ### The Community Readiness Assessment
> The instrument itself is an interview that takes 30-60 minutes. Composed of 36 questions, it is broken down into sections, each of which addresses one (or in the case of dimensions A and B, two) of the dimensions of readiness. Questions in bold are required for scoring. Others may be eliminated or revised as needed (see the box on revision below).
> **Community Readiness Assessment Interview Questions**
> **A. Community efforts (programs, activities, policies, etc.)**
> **B. Community knowledge of efforts.**
> - Using a scale from 1-10, how much of a concern is this issue in your community (with 1 being “not at all” and 10 being “a very great concern”)? Please explain. (Note to interviewers: this figure between one and ten is NOT figured into your scoring of this dimension in any way – it is only to provide a reference point.)
> - Please describe the efforts that are available in your community to address this issue. (A)
> - How long have these efforts been going on in your community? (A)
> - Using a scale from 1-10, how aware are people in your community of these efforts (with 1 being "no awareness" and 10 being "very aware")? Please explain. (Note: this figure between one and ten is NOT figured into your scoring of this dimension in any way – it is only to provide a reference point.) (B)
> - What are the strengths of these efforts? (B)
> - What are the weaknesses of these efforts? (B)
> - Who do these programs serve? (Prompt: For example, individuals of a certain age group, ethnicity, etc.) (A)
> - Would there be any segments of the community for which these efforts/services may appear inaccessible? (Prompt: For example, individuals of a certain age group, ethnicity, income level, geographic region, etc.) (A)
> - Is there a need to expand these efforts/services? If not, why not? (A)
> - Is there any planning for efforts/services going on in your community surrounding this issue?  If yes, please explain. (A)
> - What formal or informal policies, practices and laws related to this issue are in place in your community, and for how long? (Prompt: An example of “formal” would be established policies of schools, police, or courts. An example of “informal” would be similar to the police not responding to calls from a particular part of town, etc.) (A)
> - Are there segments of the community for which these policies, practices and laws may not apply? (Prompt: For example, due to socioeconomic status, ethnicity, age, etc.) (A)
> - Is there a need to expand these policies, practices and laws? If so, are there plans to expand them? Please explain. (A)
> - How does the community view these policies, practices and laws? (A)
> **C. Leadership.**
> - Who are the "leaders" specific to this issue in your community?
> - Using a scale from 1 to 10, how much of a concern is this issue to the leadership in your community (with 1 being “not at all” and 10 being “of great concern”)? Please explain.(Note to interviewers: this figure between one and ten is not figured into your scoring of this dimension in any way – it is only to provide a reference point.)
> - How are these leaders involved in efforts regarding this issue? Please explain. (For example: Are they involved in a committee, task force, etc.? How often do they meet?)
> - Would the leadership support additional efforts? Please explain.
> **D. Community climate.**
> - Describe the community.
> - Are there ever any circumstances in which members of your community might think that this issue should be tolerated? Please explain.
> - How does the community support the efforts to address this issue?
> - What are the primary obstacles to efforts addressing this issue in your community?
> - Based on the answers that you have provided so far, what do you think is the overall feeling among community members regarding this issue?
> - What type of information is available in your community regarding this issue?
> - What local data are available on this issue in your community?
> - How do people obtain this information in your community?
> **F. Resources for prevention efforts**(time, money, people, space, etc.)
> - To whom would an individual affected by this issue turn to first for help in your community? Why?
> - On a scale from 1 to 10, what is the level of expertise and training among those working on this issue (with 1 being “very low” and 10 being “very high”)? Please explain. (Note to interviewers: this figure between one and ten is not figured into your scoring of this dimension in any way – it is only to provide a reference point.)
> - How are current efforts funded? Please explain.
> - Are you aware of any proposals or action plans that have been submitted for funding that address this issue in your community? If yes, please explain.
> - Do you know if there is any evaluation of efforts that are in place to address this issue? If yes, on a scale of 1 to 10, how sophisticated is the evaluation effort (with 1 being “not at all” and 10 being “very sophisticated?”)? (Note to interviewers: this figure between one and ten is not figured into your scoring of this dimension in any way – it is only to provide a reference point.)
> - Are the evaluation results being used to make changes in programs, activities, or policies or to start new ones?
There are two questions to be answered here:
- **How do you administer and score the Community Readiness Assessment?**
- **How do you use community readiness information** _?_ We’ll look at each of these questions separately. _How do you administer and score the Community Readiness Assessment?_
- **Choose and train scorers**. Since the scoring of the assessment is quite specific, scorers need both to be trained to score it correctly (see the details on the scoring procedure and training of scorers below), and to have a good understanding of the community readiness model in general
> However, if a question is clearly irrelevant to your issue, you may need to drop the question unless it is in bold print. Those questions in bold print are essential for scoring. You may also want to add other questions that are more specific to your issue. If you want to add questions, add them to the end to avoid confusion when scoring.
> Pilot test your revised questions to make sure they are easy to understand and that they elicit the necessary information for scoring each dimension.
- **Select four to ten people to interview** _._ They should be people who know the community well, and they should be chosen to reflect the perceptions of a number of segments of the community, particularly of those directly or indirectly affected by the issue.
- **Conduct your interviews** _._ Avoid discussion with interviewees, but ask for clarification when needed and use prompts as designated.  Record or write responses as they are given. Try not to add your own interpretation or to second guess what the interviewee meant.
- **Score the interviews** _._ Determine dimension and overall readiness scores.
> _**Scoring the instrument**_
> Scoring is an easy step-by-step process that gives you the readiness stages for each of the six dimensions. The following provides the process for scoring.
> _( **You’ll find a scoring worksheet and anchored rating scales in Tool #1 below**.)_
> Ideally, two people should participate in the scoring process in order to ensure valid results on this type of qualitative data. Here are step-by-step instructions:
> - On the scoring sheet, each scorer puts his or her independent scores in the table labeled INDIVIDUAL SCORES using the scores for each dimension of each of the interviews. The table provides spaces for up to six key respondent interviews.
> - When the independent scoring is complete, the two scorers then meet to discuss the scores. The goal is to reach consensus on the scores by discussing items or statements that might have been missed by one scorer and which may affect the combined or final score assigned. Remember: Different people can have slightly different impressions, and it is important to seek explanation for the decisions made. Once consensus is reached, fill in the table labeled COMBINED SCORES on one of the scoring sheets. Add across each row to yield a total for each dimension.
> - To find the CALCULATED SCORES for each dimension, take the total for that dimension and divide it by the number of interviews. For example: If two scorers have the following combined scores for their interviews:
> Interviews #1 #2 #3 #4 #5 #6 TOTAL
> Dimension A  3.5  5.0  4.25  4.75  5.5  3.75  26.75
> TOTAL Dimension A 26.75 ÷ # of interviews 6 = 4.46
> Repeat for all dimensions, and then total the scores.
> - To find the overall stage of readiness OVERALL STAGE OF READINESS, take the total of all calculated scores and divide by the number of dimensions (6). For example:
>   - Dimension A: 4.46
>   - Dimension B: 5.67
>   - Dimension C: 2.54 Dimension
>   - D: 3.29 Dimension
>   - E: 6.43 Dimension F: 4.07
>                                                            26.46  26.46 ÷ 6 = 4.41
> - The result will be the overall stage of readiness of the community.
> The scores correspond with the numbered stages and are “rounded down” rather than up, so a score between a 1.0 and a 1.99 would be the first stage, a score of 2.0 to 2.99 would be the second and so forth. In the above example, the average 4.41 represents the fourth stage or Preplanning.
If you have one or more dimensions with lower scores than the others, focus your efforts on strategies that will increase the community’s readiness on that dimension or those dimensions first. Make certain the intensity level of the intervention or strategy is consistent with, or lower than, the stage score for that dimension.
**To be successful, any effort toward making change within a community must begin with strategies appropriate to that community’s stage of readiness.**
**Goals and General Strategies Appropriate for Each Stage**
- **No Awareness**. Here, your goal is to raise awareness that the issue exists.
- Visit existing and established small groups to inform them of the issue.
- Make one-on-one phone calls to friends and potential supporters.
- Place items in the media that explain or call attention to the issue.
- **Denial / Resistance** _._ To address this level, you have to raise awareness that the problem or issue exists in this community.
- Continue one-on-one visits and encourage those you’ve talked with to assist.
- Discuss descriptive local incidents related to the issue.
- Approach and engage local educational/health outreach programs to assist in the effort with flyers, posters, or brochures.
- Begin to point out media articles that describe local critical incidents.
- Present information to local related community groups.
- Get on the agendas and present information at local community events and to unrelated community groups.
- Post flyers, posters, and billboards.
- Begin to initiate your own events (potlucks, etc.) and use those opportunities to present information on the issue.
- Conduct informal local surveys and interviews with community people by phone or door-to-door.
- Publish newspaper editorials and articles with general information and local implications.
- Visit and invest community leaders in the cause.
- Review existing efforts in the community (curriculum, programs, activities, etc.) to determine who the target populations are and consider the degree of success of the efforts.
- Conduct local focus groups to discuss issues and develop strategies.
- Increase media exposure through radio and television public service announcements.
- **Preparation.** Here, the goal is information-gathering to lay the groundwork for planning community strategies to deal with the issue.
- Conduct school drug and alcohol surveys.
- Conduct community surveys.
- Sponsor a community picnic to kick off the effort.
- Conduct public forums to develop strategies from the grassroots level.
- Utilize key leaders and influential people to speak to groups and participate in local radio and television shows.
- Plan how to evaluate the success of your efforts.
- **Initiation.** As a more serious community effort gets under way, you’ll need to provide community-specific information to support existing programs and initiatives.
- Conduct in-service training on community readiness for professionals and paraprofessionals.
- Plan publicity efforts associated with start-up of activity or efforts.
- Attend meetings to provide updates on progress of the effort.
- Conduct consumer interviews to identify service gaps, improve existing services and identify key places to post information.
- Begin searches for additional resources and potential funding.
- Begin some basic evaluation efforts.
- **Stabilization** _._ Now that efforts and programs are in place, it’s necessary to stabilize them so as to maintain the overall community effort.
- Plan community events to maintain support for the issue.
- Conduct training for community professionals.
- Conduct training for community members.Introduce your program evaluation through training and newspaper articles.
- Conduct quarterly meetings to review progress, modify strategies.
- Hold recognition events for local supporters or volunteers.
- Prepare and submit newspaper articles detailing progress and future plans.
- Begin networking among service providers and community systems.
- **Confirmation / Expansion** _._ Once services are stabilized, the task is to expand and enhance them.
- Formalize the networking with qualified service agreements.
- Prepare a community risk assessment profile.
- Publish a localized program services directory.
- Maintain a comprehensive database available to the public.
- Develop a local speaker’s bureau.Initiate policy change through support of local city officials.
- Conduct media outreach on specific data trends related to the issue.
- Utilize evaluation data to modify efforts.
- **High Level of Community Ownership** _._ Once the community reaches the highest level, the trick is to maintain the momentum and continue growth. You’re not done – the effort has to be sustained. At this level, community members have ownership of the efforts and will invest themselves in maintaining the efforts.
- Maintain local business community support and solicit financial support from them.
- Diversify funding resources.
- Continue more advanced training of professionals and paraprofessionals.
- Continue re-assessment of issue and progress made.
- Utilize external evaluation and use feedback for program modification.
- Track outcome data for use with future grant requests.
- Continue progress reports for benefit of community leaders and local sponsorship.
## In Summary
Understanding community readiness – how ready a community is to address a particular issue – is an important tool for anyone concerned with health and community development. A community can’t be convinced to approach an issue until it realizes that the issue exists, and furthermore, that it affects the community. A community can’t be forced into action it is not ready for, or that goes against what most of its members believe.
The Tri-Ethnic Center’s community readiness model analyzes community readiness in a way that makes it possible to pinpoint a community’s level of readiness. Community builders can then use that readiness information to devise strategies for addressing the issue at hand that the community will support, and that will at the same time help the community reach the next level of readiness.
The community readiness model provides an accessible and relatively fast way of assessing a community’s level of readiness on a given issue. Its assessment tool can be used and scored by community members with a minimum of training, allowing the community both to save the funds often spent on outside experts and to take responsibility for solving its own problems, using its own expertise and assets. With that responsibility comes a sense of ownership and pride that, along with steady progress up the readiness ladder, is likely to make community efforts successful.
### Community readiness can be described by nine different levels:
1\. No Awareness. The issue is not generally recognized by the community or leaders as a problem (or it may truly not be an issue).
2\. Denial/Resistance. At least some community members recognize that it is a concern, but there is little recognition that it might be occurring locally
4\. Preplanning. There is clear recognition that something must be done, and there may even be a group addressing it. However, efforts are not focused or detailed
5\. Preparation. Active leaders begin planning in earnest. The community offers modest support of their efforts.
6\. Initiation.  Enough information is available to justify efforts. Activities are underway.
7\. Stabilization.  Activities are supported by administrators or community decision-makers. Staff are trained and experienced.
8\. Confirmation/Expansion. Efforts are in place. Community members feel comfortable using services, and they support expansions. Local data are regularly obtained.
9\. High Level of Community Ownership
**Online Resources**
**Print Resource**
"Community Readiness: _A Promising Model for Community Healing_.”
_A Native American Topic-Specific Monograph from the Center on Child Abuse and Neglect_ at the University of Oklahoma Health Science Center.

Search for:
**What is demographic data?**
- Basic features – age, gender, race/ethnicity
- Social features – households/families, education, veteran status
- Economic features – income, poverty, employment, commuting
**Why is demographic information useful?**
Demographic data can help provide a basis for understanding communities as they are now, where they’ve been and where they’re headed. It can be a powerful tool for tracking change over time and for uncovering the needs or strengths of a community to guide planning, policy development or decision making. For example, in some Wisconsin communities, data on race, ethnicity and language is being used to help understand the growth of diverse populations and guide the need for translation or interpretation for non-English speakers.
Other communities are using data on local employment and commuting to inform strategies on small business development and job training.
Demographic data can also give us a glimpse at the “before and after” so that we can understand whether a strategy or policy actually made a difference.
The availability of data for areas of any size means that demographic data can be applied to nations or neighborhoods. And it can provide a valuable framework for community input and participation. In community visioning and planning sessions, Extension educators have seen how community residents become enthusiastically engaged when data describes the place they live, and they are usually much more willing to participate and to contribute local knowledge.
**Telling the story of your community**
For example, a community resident may be able to shed light on a significant change in a community’s income or employment patterns by knowing that a new factory opened in the last several years. Or local service providers may see data that shows an increase in Latino population and understand that it is because many are coming to work at nearby dairies. In both examples, there are linkages which enrich our understanding of what the data tells us that may help us make decisions, plan or even seek out more information to complete the story.
Local knowledge can take many forms and can come from a variety of sources. Here are some suggestions for how to activate and incorporate local knowledge:
- Tap into working knowledge of a community or a population to reveal
- Important social or economic events (like a factory closing)
- Anecdotal information (like a new housing development seems to be attracting retirees)
- Talk to service providers (including schools) to get real-time information on the populations being served
- Conduct a local survey
- Present demographic information at listening sessions to get feedback and observations from community residents
- Ask local leaders and experts
**Where can you find demographic data?**
The blending of demographic data and local knowledge leads to powerful information and analysis that can be used for community and economic development, resource allocation, service and infrastructure provision and preparing for (or responding to) community change. It has become an important part of the toolkit for community leaders and organizations.
### You May Also Like
Connect With Us
Search all sites
The University of Wisconsin–Madison Division of Extension provides equal opportunities in employment and programming in compliance with state and federal law.

Explore the Toolkit Steps
Before You Begin
Map Development
Build Relationships
Develop Community Profile
Address Disparities with Data
Prioritize Needs and Assets
Document and Communicate Results
Plan Health Strategy
Develop Action Plan
Evaluate Progress
# STEP 3  Develop a Community Health Profile
The Community Health Profile includes geographic and demographic information and identifies non-clinical drivers of health. This profile is drawn from both quantitative and qualitative sources.
Specifying geographic focus and population characteristics determines the scope of your assessment and any implementation strategies. Stratifying quantitative data by ZIP code, census tract or neighborhood and qualitative data from community members will help inform this important section of your CHA.
## Seek to understand different perspectives.
## Define the CHA Geographic Boundaries
The geographic focus can include counties, cities or towns, neighborhoods, schools or other governmental districts or a collection of ZIP codes. Consider the hospital’s service area as a starting point to describe the community. In some cases, you may choose to go beyond primary and secondary service areas to areas with greater unmet health needs. Review your past CHAs to see how your community was defined and determine whether and how that definition needs to change.
## Identify Population Characteristics and Groups
### Population Characteristics
- Age (e.g., children and youth, adults, older adults)
- Race and ethnicity
- Income level
- Education level
- Insurance status
- Language preference
- Disability status
- Veteran status
- Sexual orientation
### Data Sources
- Hospital/health system employee needs surveys
- Social needs screening and referrals data
- Community input
- Electronic health record and referral platforms such as Epic, Aunt Bertha, Unite Us
- CDC PLACES and Social Vulnerability Index
- Aggregators such as City Health Dashboard and commercial vendors
## Recognize the Societal Factors that Influence Health
### Economic Stability
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, state economic development agencies and local governments. These range from unemployment percentages and job categories to types and locations of licensed businesses
### Education
U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey and local, county and state government websites
### Food Access
U.S. Department of Agriculture and local health departments. Feeding America, a nonprofit, provides its own data on food insecurity, as well
### Health Care Access
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Health Resources & Services Administration, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and state health departments
### Housing
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, local sheriff’s offices (eviction data), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, American Chemical Society (ACS), among others
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and local police departments
### Social Connectedness
American Community Survey, 100 Million Healthier Lives Well-being Assessment (adult and youth)
### Transportation
### Substance Abuse
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration National Survey on Drug Use and Health
## Collaborate with other organizations conducting health assessments.
Nonprofit hospitals are among the many organizations--including, but not limited to, local health departments, social services organizations and agencies on aging--that are required to assess the health needs of their communities. Collaboration with. other community organizations on community assessment is mutually beneficial.
If you are not already engaged in collaborative needs assessment, consider partnering with other local hospitals or health systems even if they have a different geographic scope than your hospital. Leveraging mutual interests will ensure that priority populations are included in the assessment. Moreover, this process will open up more meaningful opportunities to address community health needs in your region.
## Citation for Toolkit

An official website of New York State.
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
Official websites use ny.gov
A ny.gov website belongs to an official New York State government organization.
Secure ny.gov websites use HTTPS
An official website of New York State.
Here's how you know
Here's how you know
Official websites use ny.gov
A ny.gov website belongs to an official New York State government organization.
Secure ny.gov websites use HTTPS
New York State Community Health Indicator Reports Dashboard
### Overview of the New York State CHIRS Dashboard
### New York State Community Health Indicator Reports Data Export Links
### Technical Notes
**Indicator description and data sources**
Cancer IndicatorsCardiovascular Disease IndicatorsChild and Adolescent Health IndicatorsCirrhosis, Diabetes, and Kidney IndicatorsCommunicable Disease IndicatorsFamily Planning/Natality IndicatorsHIV/AIDS and STI IndicatorsInjury IndicatorsMaternal and Infant Health IndicatorsObesity and Related IndicatorsOccupational Health IndicatorsOral Health IndicatorsRespiratory Disease IndicatorsHealth Status and Social Determinants of HealthTobacco and Alcohol Use Indicators
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Cancer Indicators** |
| **Cardiovascular Disease Indicators** |
| **Child and Adolescent Health Indicators** |
| **Cirrhosis, Diabetes, and Kidney Indicators** |
| **Communicable Disease Indicators** |
| **Family Planning/Natality Indicators** |
| **HIV/AIDS and STI Indicators** |
| **Injury Indicators** |
| **Maternal and Infant Health Indicators** |
| **Obesity and Related Indicators** |
| **Occupational Health Indicators** |
| **Oral Health Indicators** |
| **Respiratory Disease Indicators** |
| **Health Status and Social Determinants of Health** |
| **Tobacco and Alcohol Use Indicators** |
\\*\\* The standard population used for age adjustment was the 2000 U.S. population.
#### Data Notes:
New York State consists of two registration areas, New York City and New York State Exclusive of New York City (also referred as Rest of State). New York City (NYC) includes the five counties of Bronx, Kings (Brooklyn), New York (Manhattan), Queens and Richmond (Staten Island); the remaining 57 counties comprise New York State Exclusive of New York City. The Bureau of Vital Records, New York State Department of Health (NYSDOH), processes data from live birth, death, fetal death and marriage certificates recorded in New York State Exclusive of New York City. Through a cooperative agreement, the New York State Department of Health receives data on live births, deaths, fetal deaths and marriages recorded in New York City from the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (NYCDOHMH) and on live births and deaths recorded outside of New York State
to residents of New York State from other states and Canada.
Vital Event indicators for NYC geographical areas reported by NYSDOH and NYCDOHMH may be different since the former may include all NYC residents' events regardless of where they occurred and the latter reports only events to NYC residents that occurred in NYC. The indicators may also differ due to timing and/or completeness of data.
The counts of births and deaths may be influenced by specific reporting issues each year. The specific issues are reported in the technical notes of the Vital Statistics reports, in the Report Measures section.
All the vital statistics presented in this report are based on the county/borough of residence.
Starting in the fourth quarter of 2015, the hospital data system changed to using the ICD-10-CM for diagnoses. CHIRS used the ICD-10-CM primary diagnosis codes and up to 24 other diagnosis codes from the hospital data system to generate tables and charts to describe hospitalizations and ED visits in 2016
and after. CHIRS does not include hospitalizations and ED visits in 2015, as the ICD codes changed part way through the year.
The SPARCS data do not include visits/discharges by people who sought care from hospitals outside of New York State, which may lower numbers and rates for some counties, especially those which border other states.
County of residence was assigned based on ZIP Code for cases in which patient county of residence was listed as unknown or missing, but a valid NY ZIP Code was present.
weight status category. Because of restrictions in reporting due to the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), parents'/guardians' ability to request that their child's weight status data be excluded from reporting, and other sources of missing data, not all students have data in the data system. The percent of students with reported data varies from county to county. Therefore these estimates do not necessarily represent all school aged-children attending school in that county.
Because school districts report weight status data separately for students in elementary school, middle/high school, and the school district as a whole, the counts of students represented in the district totals for a county will not necessarily equal the counts of students in the elementary and middle/high totals for that county. See more information on [Health\\
## Additional information on data sources and presentation
Numerous data sources were used to develop this information including:
- Mortality and natality data: New York State birth and death files
- Hospitalization and emergency department (ED) visit data: Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative Systems (SPARCS) files, based on hospital discharges and ED visits
- Disease and condition specific data: Department of Health disease registries, including cancer, AIDS/HIV, communicable disease, tuberculosis and sexually transmitted infection
- National data: U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Feeding America, Measure of America
- Population data: The 2018 population estimates are also used to calculate rates for 2019 and 2020.
Mortality and hospitalization based indicators are presented as both crude and age-adjusted rates. The standard population that was used for adjustment was the 2000 United States population. Age adjustment allows for the comparison of rates between geographic areas with different age distributions.
- Region 1: Long Island
- Region 2: New York City
- Region 3: Mid-Hudson
- Region 4: Capital Region
- Region 5: Mohawk Valley
- Region 6: North Country
- Region 7: Tug Hill Seaway
- Region 8: Central New York
- Region 9: Southern Tier
- Region 10: Finger Lakes
- Region 11: Western New York
- The first blue letter "i" icon displays a text box showing the definition of the indicator.
- Clicking on the map icon will produce a map of the state with each county having a color indicating its status in a quartile distribution. Clicking on a county will bring users to the county specific trend graph of that indicator (if available).
- Clicking on the square white table icon will produce a data table of the entire state with each county's data.
- Clicking on the colored bar chart icon will produce a bar graph of the entire state with each county's data displayed as colored bars in a graph depicting a quartile representation.
- Clicking on the trend graph icon will produce a trend graph of the state indicator.
The state dashboard also includes the at-a-glance comparisons of the two most recent data points, and charts showing the indicator for the state, NYC and the state excluding NYC. The dashboard also includes a "Data Table" option that shows a comprehensive data table of all indicators organized by the health-related topics. This table displays data for the most recent year and for the previous year by indicator.
The second option is the county health topic profiles, or the County Health Assessment Indicators (CHAI).
- The CHAI presents fifteen different health-related profiles, one for each topic, of each county.
- Each county health topic profile presents data for multiple indicators, presented in the same format described above for the data by health-related topic presentation.
- The county profiles also include dials, which indicates where the county's estimate is ranked when compared to all the other counties in New York State. The county estimate is categorized into quartiles. The LIGHT GREEN area of the dial represents the highest performing group, while the dark blue area of the dial represents the lowest performing group. The pointer shows where the selected county's estimate is ranked. The color at the center of the dial represents the category in which the selected county belongs.
## Suggested Citation
**Methodology and Limitations**
## Types of Estimates
1. **Percentage/age-adjusted percentage:** Percentages are calculated per 100 population (e.g., the percentage of infants exclusively breastfed in the hospital represents the number of infants that were fed exclusively with breast milk among 100 live infants born in the hospital).
2. **Weighted percentage/age-adjusted weighted percentage**: Weighted percentages were generated for survey data (e.g., Expanded Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System; US Census Bureau's Small Area Estimates) which ensures that the data are as representative of New York's population as possible. Weighted estimates are shown as a percentage (%) and corresponding 90% or 95% confidence intervals (CI) are presented when available.
3. **Rate/age-adjusted rate:** A rate is a measure of the frequency with which an event occurs in a defined population over a specified period of time. Rates used for the CHIR indicators are per 1,000, 10,000 or 100,000 population.
## Population Estimates
Population estimates are developed by the US Census Bureau.
developed by the Census Bureau for the National Center for Health Statistics. The 2018 population estimates are used to calculate rates for 2019 and 2020.
## Unstable Estimates
Multiple years of data were combined to generate more stable estimates when the number of events for an indicator was small (i.e., rare conditions).
The RSE is calculated by dividing the standard error of the estimate by the estimate itself, then multiplying that result by 100. The RSE is expressed as a percent of the estimate.
For notation purposes, an asterisk (\*) symbol is used to indicate that a percentage, rate, or ratio is unreliable/unstable. This usually occurs when there are less than 10 events in the numerator (RSE is greater than 30%).
## Direction of Indicator Estimates
## Grouping County Estimates **into** Three Categories for the County Maps
#### Color Categories Defined
For each CHIRS indicator, county estimates are grouped into three categories: LIGHT GREEN, BLUE-GREEN, and DARK BLUE. The three colors represent the quartile distribution of estimates for the counties, ordered from counties with the lowest percent of population with poorer health or at risk of poorer health, to counties with the highest percent of population with poorer health or at risk of poorer health.
For CHIRS indicators where higher estimates mean poorer health or greater risk of poorer health (e.g., percentage of premature deaths before age 75 years or the age-adjusted rate of cardiovascular disease hospitalizations):
- The LIGHT GREEN category includes counties which have a lower percent/rate of population with poorer health or risk of poorer health (i.e., 50% of counties with the lowest estimates; those in quartile 1 and quartile 2)
- The DARK BLUE category includes counties which have a higher percent/rate of population with poorer health or risk of poorer health. (i.e., 25% of counties with the highest estimates; those in quartile 4)
- The BLUE-GREEN category includes counties which have a percent/rate of population in the mid-range. (i.e., 25% of counties or those in quartile 3)
For CHIRS indicators where lower estimates mean poorer health or greater risk of poorer health (e.g., the percentage of the population with health insurance or the percentage of infants exclusively breastfed in the hospital):
- The LIGHT GREEN category includes counties which have a lower percent/rate of population with poorer health or risk of poorer health. (i.e., 50% of counties with the highest estimates; those in quartile 3 and quartile 4)
- The DARK BLUE category includes counties which have a higher percent/rate of population with poorer health or risk of poorer health. (i.e., 25% of counties with the lowest estimates; those in quartile 1)
- The BLUE-GREEN category includes counties which have a percent/rate of population in the mid-range. (i.e., 25% of counties or those with estimates in quartile 2)
Some indicators do not fall into the two types of indicators listed above, such as population, and percent of births which were first birth. The county dial is only a visual representation of where the county is in relation to other counties, e.g. larger or smaller, higher or lower.
## Assessing the Indicator Performance
Three different methods were used to assess indicator performance
- to assess the change (increase/decrease or improve/worsen) in estimates between the two most
recent time periods. The p-value for rejecting the null hypothesis is less than or equal to 0.05 and the critical
value for the one-sided test is 1.645.
- to assess the difference in estimates between a county estimate and a region/statewide estimate. The p-value for rejecting the null hypothesis is less than or equal to 0.05 and the critical
value for the test is 1.96.
around an estimate that conveys how precise the estimate is. Differences between estimates are considered "statistically significant" when the estimates being compared do not have overlapping
confidence intervals. For the purposes of this dashboard, in cases where the confidence intervals overlap, the difference is interpreted as not statistically significant at the 95% confidence level.
NOTE: This method is an approximation of a statistical test and may result in a more conservative finding. In some cases, an appropriate statistical test would indicate a statistically significant
difference even though the confidence intervals overlap and falsely imply no significant difference. When two confidence intervals do not overlap, though, a comparable statistical test would always
3. **Simple comparison** was conducted where the two estimates were directly compared to each other
based on their magnitude. This was performed when there was not a sufficient amount of data to conduct significance
testing; or if confidence intervals could not be calculated; or if there is some overlap of the two time intervals being
compared (e.g., 2012-2014 and 2013-2015 maternal mortality indicators).
Use caution when interpreting significance. For more common conditions (i.e., high incidence rates), there is a
higher likelihood that a relatively small change could be detected as statistically significant. Conversely,
for rare conditions, the likelihood of detecting a statistically significant change is low even for reasonable changes.
On the State and County dashboards, the categories for the Indicator Performance
are as follows:
- Significantly improved
- Significantly worsened
- Significantly increased
- Significantly decreased
- No significant change
- Improved^
- Worsened^
- Increased^
- Decreased^
- No change^
- No trend data
- Data not comparable
The "^" sign indicates that the performance was determined using simple comparison and not with statistical tests.
On the **County/Region Comparison** table, hover boxes over counties include the following categories:
- For counties outside of New York City:
- Yes: The county rate was statistically different from the rest of state/state rate
- No: The county rate was not statistically different from the rest of state/state rate
- NA: No statistical tests were performed or data were not available
- For counties of New York City:
- Yes: The county rate was statistically different from the New York City/state rate
- No: The county rate was not statistically different from the New York City/state rate
- NA: No statistical tests were performed or data were not available
## Data Suppression Rules for Confidentiality
Results are not shown (i.e., suppressed) when issues of confidentiality exist. Suppression rules vary depending on the data source and the indicator. An ' _s_' notation indicates that the data did not meet reporting criteria.
#### Table 1. Summary of Data Suppression Rules
| Data Sources | Suppression Criteria |
| --- | --- |
| Bureau of Dental Health (BDH) | Margin of error>20% or Denominator <50 |
| Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) and Expanded BRFSS | Denominator <50 or Numerator < 10 |
| Vital Statistics - Death Records | Denominator population <30 |
| Statewide Perinatal Data System (SPDS) - birth records | Denominator population/births <30 |
| AIDS/HIV | Numerator 1-2 cases |
| Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative System (SPARCS) - ED and hospital records | Numerator 1-5 cases |
| Office of Quality and Patient Safety (QARR and eQARR) | Denominator <30 and Numerator >0 cases |
| Cancer Registry | Numerator 1 - 15 cases |
| Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance System | Annual population less than 1,000 and secondary supression |
| NYS Pregnancy Nutrition Surveillance System (PNSS) - WIC Program | Denominator <100 |
## References
### User's Guide
This is the user's guide to the Prevention Agenda dashboard. However, most of the directions on using the dashboard also apply to the CHIRS dashboard. Note: The CHIRS dashboard does not have a sub-county section or a socio-demographics section.
### Other Dashboards and Useful Links
Public Health Information Group at:
Revised: April 2024