# Libraries After Dark: a public health pilot
Jun 29, 2019
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Press enter or click to view image in full size
So what did they do. All four libraries opened one night a week till 10 pm. As social isolation was recognised as a major risk factor for the risk of falling into gambling addiction this was the principle driver the program tried to address. Gambling venues are appealing, warm and welcoming, open to singles without them feeling out of place or unsafe and of course they are also open late. Libraries After Dark created a welcoming, safe alternative welcoming space. As this was a pilot project we did have success measures to attempt to provide evidence that this type of social intervention could work to address the needs of those at most risk of gambling harm.
Each library offered a variety of options. The key success factors were that there was something to do, something to eat and drink, it was warm, and there was no pressure on those who were in the library to join in if they chose just to be there.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
1. **_Increase Awareness of the Local Library as an alternative social option to gambling venues_**
A total of 33,404 people attended the program across the four libraries — well over the expected audience. Evidence that the targeted audience as reached is provided in the feedback forms and that gambling awareness / support services pamphlets were taken. Some of the activities were designed with and in partnership with local gambling harm support services which increased awareness of the help available locally.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
**_2\. Increase Participation of the target group in library activities_**
## Get Jane Cowell’s stories in your inbox
Join Medium for free to get updates from this writer.
Due to the nature of the program we were not able to prove how many people from the pilot’s secondary prevention target — those at risk of gambling harm — were reached. There was an attempt to use a themed postcard to gather written feedback on the program with an added benefit of a Food voucher prize but ultimately the library staff could not maintain this manual marketing feature as it was difficult to distribute into the key areas and to collect.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
This was definitely achieved. Evidence also shows that library staff now have an in depth understanding of the services that exist to support community members. This is now part of staff knowledge that builds on their ability to support their community and to refer those in need to the correct services. It also showed library staff of a key issue in their local community that they were unaware of.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
4\. **_Increase linkages in the region of services working towards harm prevention, libraries, and social policy and public health functions within Councils_**
Press enter or click to view image in full size
**_Key Learnings from the project_**
**Food and Drink** was very important to the program to reach a different library audience and also to compete with the Pokie venues. Cups of tea and coffee available and snacks were available for library visitors to make themselves and it proved to enhance the social aspect of the library programs.
**Consistent High Profile Branding** was essential. This was used by all four library services. The message was very simple: _Libraries After Dark: we are open till 10 pm every Thursday._ Posters, social media posts and all marketing carried this consistent branding with the images and colors really gaining traction in the community as the pilot matured throughout the 12 months of delivery.
**Widening the Partnership base** beyond the public library sector also provided a valuable approach when delivering a public health intervention program. It was important to realise that the Library did not have to do this alone and by collaborating with other providers we were able to amplify all partners impact throughout the program. There was a demonstrated benefit for all partners. This approach has the potential to expand to other public health issues and other social determinants of health issues affecting disadvantaged people and their communities. Libraries After Dark demonstrated that partnering with a library has a positive impact on a public health issue within the community.
Press enter or click to view image in full size
Public Libraries can move from evidence based practice to a more proactive practice based evidence approach. Piloting projects to build evidence of library impact in areas of public health, literacy, digital inclusion, and critical thinking within communities. It does mean libraries being more comfortable to constantly iterate or prototype ideas /projects that address a critical issue within their communities. This approach means adopting a learning / doing model of constant research. We plan a project (and not plan it to a perfect level but plan it to learn) then action it while we observe, evaluate as we go. Then we review how we have gone in the middle of the project, not at the end. Then adjust as needed and finish the project building the evidence of impact.
In this type of approach we can really invite our communities, and our partners, to help plan the project and find co-created solutions. This is a very community empowering model. It does take a lot of different thinking for library staff though as our current go to model is to ‘Do To’ of ‘Do For’ the community because we know best. Imagine moving to a more empowering approach where we work with the community to design local solutions.
Librarian, interested in libraries, digital disruption, startups, Australian politics
## No responses yet
Write a response
## More from Jane Cowell
[**Why Avoiding Behavior Conversations Damages Library Team Culture — And What to Do Instead**\\
[**If You Feel Lonely or Isolated, Your Local Library can be the “Third Place” in Your Life**\\
Dec 27, 2023
[A clap icon15\\
[**Being Library Fit — Conflict is Complicated**\\
Jun 25, 2017
[A clap icon3\\
[**Strengthening Library Teams: Safety & Resilience**\\
## Recommended from Medium
[**I’ll Instantly Know You Used Chat Gpt If I See This**\\
[A clap icon23K\\
[**Your ChatGPT History Just Went Public on Google. Here’s What I Did in 10 Mins to Fix It.**\\
[A clap icon7.4K\\
[**Husbands Are 7 Times More Likely to Leave Their Wives Over This 1 Thing**\\
[A clap icon9.1K\\
[**The Smartest People I Know Are Obsessed With a Skill Many Were Told Is Useless**\\
[A clap icon16.2K\\
[**ChatGPT Is Poisoning Your Brain…**\\
[A clap icon25K\\
[**I Didn’t Know These Common Habits Were Signs of Mental Health Issues**\\
[A clap icon25K\\
Recaptcha requires verification.
protected by **reCAPTCHA**

ArticlePDF Available
# Students and Libraries May Benefit from Late Night Hours
- March 2015
Copy link Link copied
Copy link Link copied
## Abstract
A Review of:
Objective – To assess late night library usage, including a demographic profile of students benefitting from late night hours, with an analysis of the services and resources they used, and whether the use of late hours is connected to student success.
Design – A mixed-methods approach including quantitative demographic information alongside qualitative user feedback collected using a web-based survey.
Setting – A large, public research university library in the United States of America using late night operating hours (11 P.M. to 7:30 A.M.) to create 24-hour library availability 5 days per week.
Subjects – Undergraduate and graduate students.
Methods – Using the university’s building monitoring database (BMD), researchers collected data on which students were using the library building when late night hours were in effect for fall and spring semesters. Along with the date and time of entry, the BMD collected the university ID number of the students and their email address. Using student ID numbers, information from the BMD was cross-referenced with anonymized demographic information from the university’s institutional planning office, enabling comparisons across a range of other data, including students’ discipline, GPA, and other information.
Main Results – In total, researchers report that 5,822 students, representing approximately 21% of the campus population, visited the library during the late hours, for 22,383 visits. Researchers report that 57% of late night users took advantage of the extended hours on more than one occasion, with 39% returning three or more times. Sundays were the most popular day, while Thursdays were least popular. Researchers also tracked entry times, with the most popular entry times occurring between 11 P.M. to 2 A.M., accounting for 80% of all late night visits. While survey respondents were drawn entirely from the late night users, 63% preferred using the library late at night versus standard daytime operating hours.
The overall survey response rate was less than 5%. Survey respondents (n=243) reported participating in a variety of activities while visiting during late night library hours, with quiet study (87%), working on projects or papers (72%), and group study (42%) as the most frequently reported activities. Respondents also ranked the top three activities they hoped to accomplish while in the library: quiet study (50%) and work on projects and papers (34%) remained top activities, though group study (20%) fell to fourth place, slightly behind the third-ranked activity of printing or copying documents (22%).
Regarding the sample, researchers found that the population of late night library users closely reflected the overall university population. An independent samples t-test comparing the differences between the average GPA of late night users to the average GPA of the overall university population was statistically insignificant. For undergraduates only, there exists a small difference between the retention rate of students using late night hours (84.6%) versus overall university retention rate (80.2%). A Pearson’s chi-squared test revealed a statistically significant association between late night library use and retention rates for both undergraduate and graduate populations when compared to the retention rates of non-late night users across the same student groups.
Conclusion – This study reveals that undergraduate students in particular make use of late night hours for studying or other academic activities, and positions the late night model as a successful customer service offering at Kent State University. Although researchers do conclusively connect the availability of late night hours to student retention and academic success, their study points to the need for further research exploring this question.
**Discover the world's research**
- 25+ million members
- 160+ million publication pages
- 2.3+ billion citations
Author content
All content in this area was uploaded by Richard Hayman on Sep 02, 2015
Evidence Based Library and Information Practice 2015, 10.1
Evidence Based Library and Information Practice
Evidence Summary
Students and Libraries May Benefit from Late Night Hours
A Review of:
Scarletto, E. A., Burhanna, K. J., & Richardson, E. (2013). Wide awake at 4 AM: A study of late night
user behavior, perceptions and performance at an academic library. Journal of Academic
Reviewed by:
Richard Hayman
Assistant Professor & Digital Initiatives Librarian
Mount Royal University
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Email: rhayman@mtroyal.ca
Received: 23 Nov. 2014Accepted: 10 Feb. 2015
sa/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
work is properly attributed, not used for commercial purposes, and, if transformed, the resulting work is
redistributed under the same or similar license to this one.
Objective – To assess late night library usage,
including a demographic profile of students
benefitting from late night hours, with an
analysis of the services and resources they
used, and whether the use of late hours is
connected to student success.
Design –A mixed-methods approach
including quantitative demographic
information alongside qualitative user
feedback collected using a web-based survey.
Setting –A large, public research university
library in the United States of America using
late night operating hours (11 P.M. to 7:30
A.M.) to create 24-hour library availability 5
days per week.
Subjects – Undergraduate and graduate
Methods –Using the university’s building
monitoring database (BMD), researchers
collected data on which students were using
the library building when late night hours
were in effect for fall and spring semesters.
Along with the date and time of entry, the
BMD collected the university ID number of the
students and their email address. Using
student ID numbers, information from the
BMD was cross-referenced with anonymized
demographic information from the
university’s institutional planning office,
enabling comparisons across a range of other
data, including students’ discipline, GPA, and
other information.
Evidence Based Library and Information Practice 2015, 10.1
Researchers emailed students the web-based
use of the library’s late night operating hours.
Survey questions investigated when students
used the library, explored student aims when
in the library, and asked students to rank the
tasks they were trying to accomplish while in
the library. In addition, researchers sought
student feedback on what services and
resources they used during late hours, asking
students to identify services and resources
they would have liked to use but which were
not offered during late night hours, and
security when using the library late at night.
Main Results –In total, researchers report that
5,822 students, representing approximately
21% of the campus population, visited the
library during the late hours, for 22,383 visits.
Researchers report that 57% of late night users
took advantage of the extended hours on more
than one occasion, with 39% returning three or
more times. Sundays were the most popular
day, while Thursdays were least popular.
Researchers also tracked entry times, with the
most popular entry times occurring between
11 P.M. to 2 A.M., accounting for 80% of all
late night visits. While survey respondents
were drawn entirely from the late night users,
63% preferred using the library late at night
versus standard daytime operating hours.
The overall survey response rate was less than
5%. Survey respondents (n=243) reported
participating in a variety of activities while
visiting during late night library hours, with
quiet study (87%), working on projects or
papers (72%), and group study (42%) as the
most frequently reported activities.
Respondents also ranked the top three
activities they hoped to accomplish while in
the library: quiet study (50%) and work on
projects and papers (34%) remained top
activities, though group study (20%) fell to
fourth place, slightly behind the third-ranked
activity of printing or copying documents
Respondents reported their use of services
during late night hours, indicating use of the
university’s wireless Internet access, library
printers, computers, and online databases and
electronic resources. The only staff service
point available to students during overnight
hours, circulation services, was used by 16% of
respondents. Regarding student responses
would have liked to have available, the
researchers reveal that “\[f\]ood and drink were
overwhelmingly the most frequently requested
services” (p. 374), followed by a desire for
more comfortable furniture and spaces. Some
respondents also requested that late night
hours be extended to seven days a week.
Overall, 96% of those submitting user feedback
reported a sense of security, an important
consideration for late night hours.
Regarding the sample, researchers found that
the population of late night library users
closely reflected the overall university
population. An independent samples t-test
comparing the differences between the average
GPA of late night users to the average GPA of
the overall university population was
statistically insignificant. For undergraduates
only, there exists a small difference between
the retention rate of students using late night
hours (84.6%) versus overall university
retention rate (80.2%). A Pearson’s chi-squared
test revealed a statistically significant
association between late night library use and
retention rates for both undergraduate and
graduate populations when compared to the
retention rates of non-late night users across
the same student groups.
Conclusion –This study reveals that
undergraduate students in particular make use
of late night hours for studying or other
academic activities, and positions the late night
model as a successful customer service offering
at Kent State University. Although researchers
do conclusively connect the availability of late
night hours to student retention and academic
success, their study points to the need for
further research exploring this question.
The study anticipates trends recently
discovered elsewhere, and contributes to the
broader conversation of library operating
Evidence Based Library and Information Practice 2015, 10.1
hours. For example, Sanders and Hodges’
(2014) related study found that 22% of the on-
campus student population visited the library
between 11 P.M. and 8 A.M. (p. 314).
Meanwhile, Sowell and Nutefall (2014) report
that 90% of student survey respondents
(n=825) agreed that the availability of late
success (p. 108). While further study is needed
to determine the connections, if any, between
student success and retention and library
operating hours, it is hard to deny the positive
perceptions that students have regarding late
night hours.
With a minimal staffing model and only one
service point available, this research does not
provide evidence regarding how academic
libraries should staff late night operations.
However, the qualitative evidence from this
study provides valuable information on the
types of services, resources, and technologies
required by students who take advantage of
late night hours. Libraries looking to offer 24-
hour access should be prepared to have basic
university technology resources, such as
wireless Internet access and printing. The
researchers note the minimal demand for
technical support for these services, perhaps
suggesting that late night users do not expect
the same level of service as during the day. It is
unsurprising that late night users require
options for food and drink, and desire
comfortable spaces when working late at
night, and this study reminds us that libraries
should account for this need if drawing on this
study as evidence for their own operating
hours decisions. Finally, the inclusion of the
survey instrument as an appendix would
strengthen this article’s presentation of survey
results. Without knowing the questions posed
and other details of the instrument, it is
difficult to judge the validity of the data,
including the reliability and replicability of the
The large quantitative sample size,
comprehensive quantitative data collection,
and comparisons to overall institutional data
all help contribute to the validity of this
research (Glynn, 2006). Regarding how data
are reported, n-values are only given for some
of the responses, while others are only
reported as percentages, making direct
statistical comparisons a challenge. This
shortcoming is compounded by the fact that
the authors report different n-values for the
quantitative dataset throughout the
manuscript. This data, objectively collected by
the building monitoring system, should
remain constant. If there are corrected n-values
for reporting different results, the reasons for
these corrections should be described in detail
for the benefit of the reader. The combination
of minimal statistical analysis and unexplained
shifts in n-value reporting do call into question
the validity of specific results being
reported. This is particularly worth noting
when it comes to an important research
attempt to connect late night hours to
academic success and student retention, which
ultimately receives limited attention.
As university libraries look for additional ways
to assess their student impact under tight
budget constraints, and as students demand
greater flexibility, operating hours will
continually come under examination. Even
with the limitations of this study, libraries
considering the adoption of late night hours
should find this research to be useful evidence
that extended hours can have positive
customer service benefits, and that such hours
address students’ need for study space at times
most convenient for them.
Glynn, L. (2006). A critical appraisal tool for
library and information
research. Library Hi Tech,24(3), 387-
Evidence Based Library and Information Practice 2015, 10.1
Sanders, M., & Hodges, C. (2014). An overnight
success?: Usage patterns and
demographics of academic library
patrons during the overnight period
from 11 p.m.-8 a.m. Journal of Access
Services, 11(4), 309-320.
Sowell, S. L., & Nutefall, J. E. (2014). Mysteries in
the night: An exploratory study of
student use and perceptions of 24/5
hours. Public Services Quarterly, 10(2), 96-
... They concluded that late-night hour services have a positive impact on students' ability to retain the information they learned and also on their overall academic accomplishment. Hayman (2015) also indicated that library extension hours can have a positive impact on students' academic life as well as helping students to study at times most suitable to them. ...
This study assesses undergraduate students’ views on the 24-hour library service at the C.K. Tedam University of Technology and Applied Sciences, Navrongo, Ghana. Using the survey approach, 168 students were randomly selected from three faculties of the University to participate in the study. The findings of this study revealed that students need to use the library 24 hours all the time and not only during examination periods. The findings further indicated that this would help the students to utilize the library’s facilities and resources to the fullest and at their own pace. The study, therefore, recommends that academic libraries must be given the maximum support to render such service to students since the continuous existence of every university or college depends on them.
Show abstract
... Furthermore, a 24-hour library service would provide access to resources to which students may otherwise not have access. Hayman (2015) established that students used the 24-hour library service for the university's wireless internet access, library printers, computers, and online databases and electronic resources. In a developing country such as South Africa, for many students who live off-campus, internet access remains a challenge, in particular for students from low socio-economic groups (Czerniewicz and Brown 2013;Rambe and Nel 2015). ...
Full-text available
Full-text available
- LIBR HI TECH
– As the interest in evidence‐based librarianship increases, so does the need for a standardized practice methodology. One of the most essential components of EBL, critical appraisal, has not been fully established within the library literature. The purpose of this paper is to outline and describe a thorough critical appraisal tool and process that can be applied to library and information research in an evidence based setting.
Design/methodology/approach
– To create a critical appraisal tool for EBL, it was essential to look at other models. Exhaustive searches were carried out in several databases. Numerous articles were retrieved which provided “evidence” or “best practice” based on a critical appraisal. The initial tool, when created, was distributed to several librarians who provided comments to the author regarding its exhaustiveness, ease of use and applicability and was subsequently revised to reflect their suggestions and comments.
– The critical appraisal tool provides a thorough, generic list of questions that one would ask when attempting to determine the validity, applicability and appropriateness of a study.
Originality/value
– More rigorous research and publishing will be encouraged as more librarians and information professionals adopt the practice of EBL and utilize this critical appraisal model
Show abstract
During the Fall 2013 semester East Carolina University's main library piloted 24/5 hours of operation by opening on Sunday morning and not closing until Friday night. This article details the planning and execution of the pilot program, as well the findings from the data collected during the overnight period by people-counting cameras and a university identification card reader. The data reveal library usage during specific days and hours of the overnight period, usage during specific periods of the semester, and the demographic information of overnight undergraduate and graduate student users.
Show abstract
Show abstract
An overnight success?: Usage patterns and demographics of academic library patrons during the overnight period from 11 p.m.-8 a.m
- J Access Serv
- M Sanders
Sanders, M., & Hodges, C. (2014). An overnight
success?: Usage patterns and
demographics of academic library
patrons during the overnight period
from 11 p.m.-8 a.m. Journal of Access
Services, 11(4), 309-320.

Search ScienceDirect
## Article preview
# Opening hours: the contest between diminishing resources and a 24/7 world
Author links open overlay panelAnnCurry
Add to Mendeley
## Abstract
## Section snippets
## Previous research
Ann Curry is an Associate Professor at the School of Library, Archival, and Information Studies, The University of British Columbia, 6190 Agronomy Road, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada [ann.curry@ubc.ca](mailto:ann.curry@ubc.ca)
Recommended articles
2016, Library Review
2015, New Review of Academic Librarianship
2013, Journal of Access Services
2012, New Library World
2006, New Library World
2005, New Library World
Ann Curry is an Associate Professor at the School of Library, Archival, and Information Studies, The University of British Columbia, 6190 Agronomy Road, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada [ann.curry@ubc.ca](mailto:ann.curry@ubc.ca)

# Students and Libraries May Benefit from Late Night Hours
- Richard Hayman
Mount Royal University
## Abstract
A Review of:
Objective – To assess late night library usage, including a demographic profile of students benefitting from late night hours, with an analysis of the services and resources they used, and whether the use of late hours is connected to student success.
Design – A mixed-methods approach including quantitative demographic information alongside qualitative user feedback collected using a web-based survey.
Setting – A large, public research university library in the United States of America using late night operating hours (11 P.M. to 7:30 A.M.) to create 24-hour library availability 5 days per week.
Subjects – Undergraduate and graduate students.
Methods – Using the university’s building monitoring database (BMD), researchers collected data on which students were using the library building when late night hours were in effect for fall and spring semesters. Along with the date and time of entry, the BMD collected the university ID number of the students and their email address. Using student ID numbers, information from the BMD was cross-referenced with anonymized demographic information from the university’s institutional planning office, enabling comparisons across a range of other data, including students’ discipline, GPA, and other information.
Main Results – In total, researchers report that 5,822 students, representing approximately 21% of the campus population, visited the library during the late hours, for 22,383 visits. Researchers report that 57% of late night users took advantage of the extended hours on more than one occasion, with 39% returning three or more times. Sundays were the most popular day, while Thursdays were least popular. Researchers also tracked entry times, with the most popular entry times occurring between 11 P.M. to 2 A.M., accounting for 80% of all late night visits. While survey respondents were drawn entirely from the late night users, 63% preferred using the library late at night versus standard daytime operating hours.
The overall survey response rate was less than 5%. Survey respondents (n=243) reported participating in a variety of activities while visiting during late night library hours, with quiet study (87%), working on projects or papers (72%), and group study (42%) as the most frequently reported activities. Respondents also ranked the top three activities they hoped to accomplish while in the library: quiet study (50%) and work on projects and papers (34%) remained top activities, though group study (20%) fell to fourth place, slightly behind the third-ranked activity of printing or copying documents (22%).
Regarding the sample, researchers found that the population of late night library users closely reflected the overall university population. An independent samples t-test comparing the differences between the average GPA of late night users to the average GPA of the overall university population was statistically insignificant. For undergraduates only, there exists a small difference between the retention rate of students using late night hours (84.6%) versus overall university retention rate (80.2%). A Pearson’s chi-squared test revealed a statistically significant association between late night library use and retention rates for both undergraduate and graduate populations when compared to the retention rates of non-late night users across the same student groups.
Conclusion – This study reveals that undergraduate students in particular make use of late night hours for studying or other academic activities, and positions the late night model as a successful customer service offering at Kent State University. Although researchers do conclusively connect the availability of late night hours to student retention and academic success, their study points to the need for further research exploring this question.
### Downloads
## Author Biography
Assistant Professor & Digital Initiatives Librarian
## Downloads
## Published
## How to Cite
More Citation Formats
Evidence Summaries
## Current Issue
Editor-in-Chief: Dr. Ann Medaille
Twitter Widget Iframe

# Wide Awake at 4 AM: A Study of Late Night User Behavior, Perceptions and Performance at an Academic Library
- September 2013
- This person is not on ResearchGate, or hasn't claimed this research yet.
- This person is not on ResearchGate, or hasn't claimed this research yet.
Request full-text
Copy link Link copied
Copy link Link copied
## Abstract
**Discover the world's research**
- 25+ million members
- 160+ million publication pages
- 2.3+ billion citations
## No full-text available
you can request a copy directly from the authors.
Request full-text PDF
... The data may otherwise remain entirely unused or be reserved for internal operational decisions only, though one study examining the data used and impetuses for changing operating hours and staff scheduling at medium-sized college libraries found that a low percentage of libraries used gate count data to inform their staffing decisions (Brunsting, 2008). Published library studies that have analyzed gate counts and card swipes did so as part of an assessment of the success of extending hours (Lawrence & Weber, 2012;Scarletto et al., 2013), changing service models (Albanese, 2003;Jones, 2011), or in the context of declining use of print resources and reference services over longer periods of time (Martell, 2007;Opperman & Jamison, 2008). Beyond these studies, libraries publish relatively little on variations in physical use of library spaces, neither as a function of shorter, defined periods of time nor in response to external events. ...
... As previously noted, the studies including gate counts and user surveys for normal (non-exam) weeks in their data collection methods find common patterns. Library usage is highest at the beginning of the week and then progressively declines between Wednesday and Saturday (Dotson & Garris, 2008;Ferria et al., 2017;Scarletto et al., 2013). Similar patterns are observed in the use of library electronic resources usage throughout the week (Clotfelter, 2011). ...
Full-text available
Show abstract
... The nature of the evaluated research mandates gaining IRB approval, yet only six library learning analytics studies specifically reference the IRB process (or their country's equivalent) in the published text (Bowles-Terry, 2012;Cherry, Rollins, & Evans, 2013;Haddow & Joseph, 2010;Samson, 2014;Scarletto, Burhanna, & Richardson, 2013;Thorpe, Lukes, Bever, & He, 2016). Haddow and Joseph (2010) is one of these; they describe gaining approval from their University's Human Research Ethics Committee on the condition of ensuring that "individual students were not identified or identifiable and the secure storage of data" (p. ...
... L. Jones, 2010;Kot & Jones, 2015;LeMaistre, 2015;LeMaistre et al., 2018;Massengale, Piotrowski, & Savage, 2016;McCarthy, 2017;Montenegro et al., 2016;Murray et al., 2016;Nackerud et al., 2012Nackerud et al., , 2013Odeh, 2012;Pepper & Jantti, 2015;Renaud et al., 2015;Scarletto et al., 2013;Scott, 2014;Soria et al., 2014Soria et al., , 2017aSoria et al., , 2017bSoria et al., , 2013Soria et al., , 2015Squibb & Mikkelsen, 2016;Stemmer & Mahan, 2015Stone, Pattern, & Ramsden, 2012;Thorpe et al., 2016;White & Stone, 2010;Wong & Cmor, 2011;Wong & Webb, 2011). Of these, only LeMaistre et al. (2018) explicitly states that the transfer is being done "securely. ...
... Seven studies remove only direct identifiers in their anonymization process, leaving behind data sets that likely still violate patron privacy (Allison, 2015;McCarthy, 2017;Montenegro et al., 2016;Nackerud et al., 2013;Renaud et al., 2015;Scarletto et al., 2013;Thorpe et al., 2016). Of these, one library described anonymizing data that contained patron library usage indicators and demographics (such as major, gender, and ethnicity) by saying that "Internet IDs were removed from the data, creating an anonymized set" (Nackerud et al., 2013, p. 138); this, by definition, is not an anonymized set. ...
Full-text available
Show abstract
... Many libraries subsequently reduce or eliminate such services. Libraries that do offer extended hours services typically focus on circulation \[4,15,27\]. As previously noted, most of these statistics come from academic libraries, but the findings are mirrored in two HSL-based studies, which found that most survey respondents neither borrowed materials, requested articles, nor requested skilled assistance from staff during extended hours \[30,31\]. ...\
Full-text available\
- Oct 2024\
Background: Students regularly state a strong preference for increased library operational hours to accommodate learning needs. While many academic libraries provide extended hours, academic health sciences libraries appear to adopt such models less frequently. This is not due to lower levels of student demand for extended hours. Case Presentation: In response to student preferences for increased hours, our institution shifted its budget to provide an additional 10 weekend hours (Friday-Sunday). This study is a post-hoc assessment of temporal changes in physical library use over weekend days pre- and post-implementation of extended hours. This study used (non-exam) weekend physical library usage data one year before and after implementing extended hours (January 2018-January 2020). We ran descriptive statistics to assess the hourly use pattern changes in physical library usage. Conclusion: For the regular academic year, students arrived earlier and stayed later, with less severe hourly peaks in opening and closing times physical use patterns seen in the pre-implementation period. Overall, we saw increases in all three areas of physical usage data studied. The data provides evidence of the true need for extended hours among users, along with hourly patterns reflecting a better match of hours with patron study patterns.\
Show abstract\
... Level 100 students also recorded high patronage of the service compared to other levels and this is possibly so because level 100 students are new to the university system and are eager and desperate to work harder to achieve a good grade point average (GPA), unlike continuing students who are already used to the university system and are not eager or desperate to stretch themselves too much with their studies. These results corroborate the findings of Sowell and Nutefall (2014) and Scarletto et al. (2013). These authors showed in their study that undergraduate students are the habitual users of late-night services provided by libraries. ...\
- Dec 2021\
This study assesses undergraduate students’ views on the 24-hour library service at the C.K. Tedam University of Technology and Applied Sciences, Navrongo, Ghana. Using the survey approach, 168 students were randomly selected from three faculties of the University to participate in the study. The findings of this study revealed that students need to use the library 24 hours all the time and not only during examination periods. The findings further indicated that this would help the students to utilize the library’s facilities and resources to the fullest and at their own pace. The study, therefore, recommends that academic libraries must be given the maximum support to render such service to students since the continuous existence of every university or college depends on them.\
Show abstract\
- Jun 2021\
... Besides, the perceived high internet speed at nights can be an attribute to high patronage of library night hour service by users. Research by Scarletto, Burhanna and Richardson (2013) reported the use of library services during late night hours and indicate that the service was highly patronized because of the university's internet network access, library's computer systems, as well as online databases among others. 7 Nevertheless, huge statistics of attendance to library services cannot be the only determining factor to measure performance achievement by libraries but the need to look beyond to find out whether these services meet the needs of users of day and the future. ...\
... Other respondents suggested that the library should improve on the power supply for them to use the library effectively. Saka (2010) and Scarletto, Burhanna and Richardson (2013) confirmed that most library users were satisfied with extended library-hour service because of its relevance. The relevance of library usage to individual users are quite subjective especially with this current dispensation were information and knowledge is key to the development of individuals and societies. ...\
Full-text available\
- Sep 2017\
... Besides, the perceived high internet speed at nights can be an attribute to high patronage of library night hour service by users. Research by Scarletto, Burhanna and Richardson (2013) reported the use of library services during late night hours and indicate that the service was highly patronized because of the university's internet network access, library's computer systems, as well as online databases among others. 7 Nevertheless, huge statistics of attendance to library services cannot be the only determining factor to measure performance achievement by libraries but the need to look beyond to find out whether these services meet the needs of users of day and the future. ...\
... Other respondents suggested that the library should improve on the power supply for them to use the library effectively. Saka (2010) and Scarletto, Burhanna and Richardson (2013) confirmed that most library users were satisfied with extended library-hour service because of its relevance. The relevance of library usage to individual users are quite subjective especially with this current dispensation were information and knowledge is key to the development of individuals and societies. ...\
Full-text available\
- Sep 2017\
... Engel, Womack and Ellis found that studying and using a computer were the two most common activities, with assistance from a librarian ranking last among nine options (2002). Survey data ranked quiet study, work on projects or papers, group study, and printing as most important (Scarletto, Burhanna & Richardson, 2013). Demand for circulation and staff services was consistently low. ...\
... However, several other studies do permit a rough estimate. Studies from other state university libraries that collect such data have found that overnight users comprised between 17.5% and 22% of the overall student body (Sanders & Hodges, 2014;Scarletto, Burhanna & Richardson, 2013). If our overnight "usage rate" was similar to these, our estimated overnight user population would range between approximately 9,500 and 12,000. ...\
Full-text available\
- Sep 2017\
Objective – This paper reports on a study which assessed the preferences and behaviors of overnight library users at a major state university. The findings were used to guide the design and improvement of overnight library resources and services, and the selection of a future overnight library site.\
Methods – A multi-method design used descriptive and correlational statistics to analyze data produced by a multi-sample survey of overnight library users. These statistical methods included rankings, percentages, and multiple regression.\
Results – Results showed a strong consistency across statistical methods and samples. Overnight library users consistently prioritized facilities like power outlets for electronic devices, and group and quiet study spaces, and placed far less emphasis on assistance from library staff.\
Show abstract\
... The trend over the past 10 years has been on increased 24-hour access to library spaces in academic libraries (Scarletto, Burhanna and Richardson 2013). Some of the investigations that have been conducted on the topic include those by Smith (2008) at the Georgia Southern University in the US, and Lawrence and Weber's (2012) at the University of Minnesota in the US. ...\
... Table 2 also shows a decline in numbers from 02:00. This was also evident in the study by Scarletto, Burhanna and Richardson (2013). Possible reasons for this could be fatigue, or that the students would be resting in preparation for a morning examination. ...\
- Aug 2017\
Full-text available\
- Mar 2022\
- J LIBR INF SCI\
Show abstract\
Full-text available\
- Sep 2020\
Show abstract\
... For instance, Kent State University kept detailed demographic and timestamp information obtained from card swipes, which students were required to provide after the library went to a 24-hour open schedule. 68 Similarly, Georgia State University captured student information from card swipes, correlating ingress and egress at specific points in the library with student residential status and grade point average, among other data points. 69 Other libraries, such as the University of Oklahoma, have explored using beacon sensors and iOS devices to push customized content and just-in-time information to users' mobile devices while track- ...\
- Apr 2018\
In this paper, the authors address learning analytics and the ways academic libraries are beginning to participate in wider institutional learning analytics initiatives. Since there are moral issues associated with learning analytics, the authors consider how data mining practices run counter to ethical principles in the American Library Association’s “Code of Ethics.quot; Specifically, the authors address how learning analytics implicates professional commitments to promote intellectual freedom; protect patron privacy and confidentiality; and balance intellectual property interests between library users, their institution, and content creators and vendors. The authors recommend that librarians should embed their ethical positions in technological designs, practices, and governance mechanisms.\
Show abstract\
... In addition, a Google search using "library finals week activities" produced hundreds of thousands of results, demonstrating the proliferation of well-being support services libraries offer at this time in the semester. The most common services reported to be offered within the Google results and library literature include extended library hours (Lawrence and Weber, 2012;Scarletto et al., 2013;Flynn, 2011), the use of therapy animals (Bell, 2013;Liddy, 2014;Montana State University, 2014;Rakoczy, 2012;Reynolds and Rabschutz, 2011;University of Wisconsin-Madison News, 2010) and offering free coffee and snacks (Elam et al., 2009;Heibert and Theriault, 2012;Newton, 2011;Smigielski and Nixon, 2004;Van Den Broek, 2004;Wight, 2003). The Google search also produced a posting by The Outreach Librarian blog and several academic ...\
- Nov 2015\
- Ref Serv Rev\
– The purpose of this article is to explore the outreach programming and support services offered at academic libraries during final exams week. The article discusses the need to provide this specialized programming, and its impact on the role of the librarian, and the use of library space.\
Design/methodology/approach\
– The survey garnered 279 responses. Nearly 40 per cent of respondents collaborate with campus and non-campus partners to provide programming. Most common offerings include extended library hours; therapy animals; as well as games; and arts and crafts. Nearly 90 per cent of respondents reported utilizing virtual media outlets for communication of final exams week events. Most common challenges included lack of funding and staffing issues.\
Practical implications\
– The survey results reflect the efforts of librarians and library staff members who are addressing the study break needs of students during the most stressful time in the semester.\
Originality/value\
– This paper provides an overview of academic library final exams week outreach initiatives and activities at institutions located in the USA and Canada.\
Show abstract\
... Although students access online library resources remotely, they still need to use the physical library space, as 80% reported that they came to the library to study alone (Gardner & Eng, 2005). Similarly, in examining academic library use between 11 p.m. and 7 a.m., Scarletto, Burhanna, and Richardson (2013) found that late night library users were attempting to study quietly (87%), work on research projects (72%), or study as a group (42%). ...\
- Oct 2014\
Show abstract\
- May 2025\
- Jun 2022\
In 2021, ECU Library embarked on a year-long user experience project to explore students' experiences of a newly refurbished space and investigate what facilities and services students would like to see at a new city campus to be opened in 2025. The study employed a number of user experience and ethnographic methods including observation, interviews, surveys, focus groups and surveys, and worked in partnership with library peer assistants to collect data. Students want a library of the future that offers a variety of flexible informal study spaces, good lighting, comfortable and ergonomic furniture, visible services, and access to technology.\
Show abstract\
- Apr 2020\
Universities are pursuing learning analytics practices to improve returns from their investments, develop behavioral and academic interventions to improve student success, and address political and financial pressures. Academic libraries are additionally undertaking learning analytics to demonstrate value to stakeholders, assess learning gains from instruction, and analyze student-library usage, et cetera. The adoption of these techniques leads to many professional ethics issues and practical concerns related to privacy. In this narrative literature review, we provide a foundational background in the field of learning analytics, library adoption of these practices, and identify ethical and practical privacy issues.\
Show abstract\
Conference Paper\
Full-text available\
- Oct 2019\
Conference Paper\
Full-text available\
- Oct 2019\
- Oct 2019\
Show abstract\
- Mar 2019\
Show abstract\
- May 2018\
The California State University Library successfully improved its library’s hours, including introducing 24-hour access, thanks in part to an assessment process that helped the University Library to develop a partnership with the students. The paper aims to discuss this issue.\
Design/methodology/approach\
The survey identified days with problematic hours and which hours student suggested changes to that would best fit most students’ needs. In response to the findings, the library immediately implemented incremental changes that fit within current library resources. The survey’s most significant finding was that 94 percent of students wanted 24-hour study in the library.\
Originality/value\
An unexpected benefit of the library making immediate, incremental changes was that students could see the results of their input and feel a sense of ownership. The findings also led to the library making 24-hour access a top priority. When university funding was not available, the university’s student government approached the library with a unique proposal to include funding for 24-hour library access in their proposed student fee increase. The student body showed its willingness to invest in the library by passing the fee increase. California State University San Marco’s library began 24/5 hours in Fall 2017.\
Show abstract\
Full-text available\
- Nov 2017\
- Libr Manag\
Design/methodology/approach\
The author will challenge the grand narrative perpetuated by LGBT librarians that “libraries save \[LGBT\] lives” through a review of existing research literature on LGBT undergraduates and their personal and academic needs, where libraries play a role in LGBT undergraduate life, and whether or not academic libraries actually meet those needs.\
Practical implications\
The author will provide suggestions for academic libraries to create appropriate resources, services, and spaces for LGBT undergraduates so that they persist at their institutions and graduate.\
Originality/value\
This is the first research paper to address the role that academic libraries play in LGBT student retention.\
Show abstract\
- Jul 2016\
Show abstract\
Full-text available\
- May 2016\
Show abstract\
- Feb 2016\
This case study explores use patterns of an academic library following the addition of several non-library units. Of specific interest were the initial destinations of patrons, the number of destinations visited, and the primary purpose for coming to the library. We observed all destinations of patrons as they entered the building and administered an exit survey to gain additional insight into patrons' use of the library, including all first floor destinations visited and their primary purpose for visiting the library. We used selected statistics to further explore library use. Findings indicate that non-library units are a popular destination for library patrons but do not eclipse the overall use of library units; that the majority of patrons only visit one destination per trip to the library; and that the primary purposes for which patrons come to the library are studying and the use of library materials.\
Show abstract\
- Oct 2015\
Show abstract\
- Oct 2014\
During the Fall 2013 semester East Carolina University's main library piloted 24/5 hours of operation by opening on Sunday morning and not closing until Friday night. This article details the planning and execution of the pilot program, as well the findings from the data collected during the overnight period by people-counting cameras and a university identification card reader. The data reveal library usage during specific days and hours of the overnight period, usage during specific periods of the semester, and the demographic information of overnight undergraduate and graduate student users.\
Show abstract\
- Jun 2014\
Show abstract\
- May 2014\
Show abstract\
- Jul 2014\
Full-text available\
- Jan 2007\
The article focuses on the renovations made in the East Commons mixed-used space at the Georgia Tech Library in Atlanta. The area consists of collaborative computer stations, study tables and modular lighting systems. The rearrangements were made to encourage students to use the library more often and to refresh their minds and bodies. The remodeled area features group-study tables where students can turn it into a small theater or presentation space that can seat a maximum of 100 people.\
Show abstract\
- Sep 2005\
- Dec 2011\
- Sep 2008\
- J Access Serv\
For eighteen years, the Georgia Southern University Library has offered twenty-four-hour service to its students. This article details that history and provides lessons learned that have helped to shape the current service.\
Show abstract\
- Jan 2001\
- Chron High Educ\
Explores how, as more students work online, some scholars wonder if something important is being lost in the abandonment of the college library. (EV)\
Show abstract\
- Jan 2002\
A current discussion topic among academic librarians is opening the library 24/7. Concern frequently focuses on whether the patrons per hour justify this use of resources. In other words, “If we open the library, will the users come?” In response to student demand for 24/7, researchers at the University of Oklahoma conducted a pilot study of late-night use at the main library. More than 80 percent of the respondents reported they were satisfied with the current hours. Seventy-four percent indicated their primary reason for coming to the library was to study. The preliminary results will be useful in designing follow-up studies. As a result of the pilot survey at Bizzell Memorial Library (the main library), the University Libraries administration has determined that extending hours to 24/7 will only be offered during finals week.\
Show abstract\
- Sep 2008\
Use of the physical collections and services of academic libraries continues to plummet, with some exceptions, while use of electronic networked resources skyrockets. This article frames the extent of this decline with a focus on circulation and reference among ARL University, Medical, and Law Libraries, the Ivy League, other associations, systems, and individual libraries.\
Show abstract\
After midnight: Late night library services\
- Jan 2008\
- Driscoll\
Student body fact sheet\
- Jan 2011\
- Kent State University\
Opening a library 24hours\
- Jan 2002\
We are the architects of our destiny\
- Jan 2010\

On February 23rd,
choose between drinking at the bar and domestic isolation.”
Unfortunately, the public and taxpayers were never able to see the results of this program as shortly after it was proposed, Spears accepted a position as Executive Director of the Pikes Peak Library District in Colorado and the plan for the 24/7 Salt Lake City Public Library was not continued.
This left a lot of
feasible, whether or not it was possible to keep the library staffed overnight,
whether or not people would actually use the library at all hours of the night
and if so, what resources are patrons using at those times. As all library
communities differ, results of this study may not have been able to give direct
answers for other libraries looking to expand their hours, but this pilot
program may have been able to give a more general idea than the library world
E-resources are also on the rise at public libraries and rapidly growing in popularity. Using these mediums patrons can download, books, audiobooks, movies and music onto their own devices. These services will aid patrons who seek expanded library hours to access books, movies, magazines, or music.
These options solves the problem of being able to interact with the library’s materials after hours, but it is unknown whether that is what patrons who have requested expanded hours are looking for. Some may be interested in library programming or seeking the assistance of a knowledgeable librarian for suggestions on research or reading material.
Disqus Comments
- ## Discussion Favorited!
- Copy link to discussion
This discussion has been closed.
Twitter Widget Iframe

# Public Libraries in the United States Survey
Fiscal Year 2010
January 2013
# Project Teams
# Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) Office of Planning, Research and Evaluation
Justin Grimes C. Arturo Manjarrez Kim A. Miller Timothy Owens Deanne W. Swan Rodney D. Vese, Jr.
# U.S. Census Bureau
J. Andrea Arroyo Terri Craig Suzanne Dorinski Michael Freeman Natasha Isaac Patricia O’Shea Peter Schilling Jennifer Scotto
# Institute of Museum and Library Services
Susan H. Hildreth, Director
The Institute of Museum and Library Services is the primary source of federal support for the nation’s
123,000 libraries and 17,500 museums. Through grant making, policy development, and research, we help
Published: January 2013
Swan, D. W., Grimes, J., Owens, T., Vese, Jr., R. D., Miller, K., Arroyo, J., Craig, T., Dorinski, S., Freeman, M., Isaac, N., O’Shea, P., Schilling, P. Scotto, J. (2013). Public Libraries Survey: Fiscal Year 2010 (IMLS-2013–PLS-01). Institute of Museum and Library Services. Washington, DC
Introduction ......
List of Figures . . 5
The National Picture . .. 7
Indicators .. . 13
Section 1. Public Library Services & Operations.. . 13
Indicator 1. Public Library Visitation Per Capita .. . 14
Indicator 2. Library Programs for Children, Youth and Adults . . 16
Indicator 3. Sources of Public Library Revenue .. . 19
Indicator 4. Change in Public Library Operating Expenditures . 22
Section 2. Public Library Resources . . 25
Indicator 5. Circulation of Public Libraries .. . 26
Indicator 6. Change in Public Library Collections . 28
Indicator 7. Computers and the Internet .. . 30
Section 3. Public Library Workforce .. . 33
Indicator 8. Public Library Staffing . . 34
Indicator 9. Librarians .... . 36
# Appendix .. . 39
Appendix B – Technical Notes .. . 42
Note 1. Commonly Used Measures . . 42
Note 2. Adjusting for Inflation: Financial Indicators and Calculations ... . 45
Note 3. Public Libraries in the United States Survey, FY 2010 ... .. 46
# Introduction
Public libraries provide critical learning and information resources for individuals, families, local businesses, and non-profits. They broaden opportunities for people of all ages through access to collections and technology and by providing expert assistance from information professionals. Many public libraries anchor community improvement efforts by providing programming that addresses the health, educational, and workforce development needs of local residents. In communities across the country, local libraries compliment commercial development activity and provide attractive neighborhood amenities in residential settings.
FY 2010, there were 8,951 public libraries in the 50 states and the District of Columbia with 17,078 public library branches and bookmobiles. This total translates to approximately 3.0 public libraries and 5.8 outlets for every 100,000 people. Although libraries in cities and suburbs comprise just over a quarter (28.4 percent) of all public libraries, they serve almost three-quarters (72.5 percent) of the population. In FY 2010, there were 487 public libraries in cities, 2,055 in suburban areas, 2,222 in towns, and 4,187 in rural areas.
The relatively high use rates and program attendance highlight the public value provided by local libraries at a time of dramatic economic, technology, and demographic change. The Public Libraries in the United States Survey is one important way of examining when, where and how library services are changing to meet those needs. The data, supplied annually by over $9 8 %$ of public libraries across the country, provides information policymakers
The FY 2010 report focusses on the character of public library services, funding and resource changes, and current trends in the public library workforce. As with past annual reports, the first section highlights statistics at the national level. In this section, data from all states has been aggregated to provide current national estimates and to examine trends from prior years.
For the first time, the report includes a section of public library indicators. This section is designed to highlight important changes in public services and resources each indicator explores how national estimates differ from those found by region, local, and state. Statistically significant differences are reported for each indicator.
# Highlights of Library Services in FY 2010
The data analyzed in this report are from the Public Libraries in the United States Survey (PLS),1 an annual survey that has been conducted since 1989. FY 2010 provides the most recent and comprehensive overview of
FISCAL YEAR 2010
the conditions in public libraries in the United States. This year’s data show the continued impact of the U.S. recession on public libraries. Nationally public libraries saw reductions in operating revenue, service hours, and staffing. Yet despite these challenges many public libraries continue to maintain service levels to meet demand. Circulation, program attendance, and computer usage all saw observable increases. Although this year’s survey identified a slight decrease in the per capita visitation it is not clear whether or not this change is due to increased availability of online services (i.e. library card and book renewal, remote use of catalog and databases), a reduction in service hours or resources due to budget cuts, a natural decline from the post-recessionary spikes in 2008 and 2009 or some other variable. Future analysis by IMLS will weigh the relative impact of these different variables in greater detail.
# Public Library Services and Operations
• While physical visits to library buildings decreased for the first time in 10 years from the prior year, visitation still remains strong with an overall 10-year increase of 32.7 percent. On average, Americans visited a public library 5.3 times per year, a 10-year increase of 21.7 percent. Although the national visitation rate is down slightly from 2009, the story at the state level is mixed, with most states showing a decrease, but some having increases.
• Public libraries offered 3.75 million programs to the public in FY 2010, which amounts to an average of at least 1 program a day for every library system in the country. The majority of these programs $( 6 1 . 5 % )$ are designed for children. Attendance at programs has continued to increase, indicating an increased demand for these services.
• Public libraries circulated 2.46 billion materials in FY 2010, the highest circulation in 10 years, representing a continued increasing trend. Circulation of children’s materials has increased by 28.3 percent in the last 10 years and comprises over one-third of all materials circulated in public libraries.
• Public access computer use continued to be one of the fastest growing services in public libraries. In FY 2010, public libraries reported a computer use rate of more than one use for every five visits to the library. Public libraries have responded to demand by increasing access, doubling the number of computers in the past 10 years.
# Public Library Resources
• Public libraries reported operating expenditures of $$ 10.77$ billion dollars in FY 2010, the first decrease since FY 2001. Although expenditures across all U.S. public libraries were $$ 36.18$ per capita, per capita expenditures varied across states.
# Public Library Workforce
• Librarians made up one-third of all library staff. Although the majority of these librarians hold a Master’s degree in Library and Information Studies from a program accredited by the American Library Association (ALA-MLS), only half of all libraries reported having a librarian with an ALA-MLS on staff.
# Data and Analysis
The PLS is a universe survey, which means that information is collected from all public libraries in the United States. When information is available from an entire population, estimates are made by summing units to the population or subpopulation. In the present report, national estimates are based on summing data across all public libraries to the national level. For estimates based on subpopulations, such as state, region, or locale, data are summed up to the level of the subpopulation.
A public library is established under state laws or regulations to serve a community, district, or region. In this document, we report only on public libraries that meet all criteria in the definition of a public library developed
# Introduction
FISCAL YEAR 2010
by the Federal-State Cooperative System (FSCS). Under this definition, a public library provides, at a minimum, the following:
An organized collection of printed or other library materials, or a combination thereof;
• Paid staff;
An established schedule in which services of the staff are available to the public;
Facilities necessary to support such a collection, staff, and schedule; and
Support in whole or in part with public funds.
A community may have only one public library or a public library system, which may have a central library and multiple branches or bookmobiles. Any reference to a public library in this report refers to the administrative entity, either a single-outlet library or a library system. References to outlets refer to central libraries, branch libraries, and bookmobiles.
In this report, we examine trends across time and across subgroups. In some cases, it might appear that one estimate is larger than another. However, a statistical test may find that the apparent difference is not a statistical difference. In cases where there is no statistical difference, the difference is not reported as such. In the analyses of the data for this report, we used a variety of statistical tests, including analysis of variance, correlation, and growth modeling of time series. Significance was set at an alpha level of .01.
All calculations in the PLS report are based on unrounded estimates. At times, the reader may find a calculation, such as a percentage change, is not identical to the calculation obtained by using the rounded values showing in the report or supplemental tables.
List of Figures
# The National Picture
Figure A. Public Libraries in the U.S. by Locale
Figure B. Total Operating Revenue and Expenditures, FY 2001-2010 (in constant 2010 dollars)
Figure C. (Figure 8-1) Number of FTE Staff by Type, FY 2001-2010
# Indicators
# Section 1: Services and Operations
1. Visits Per Capita
Figure 1-1. Visits Per Capita and Revenue (Per Capita) and Hours Open, FY 2010
Figure 1-2. Visits Per Capita, FY 2010
2. Programming
Figure 2-1. Trend of Total Programs and Children’s Programs Per 1,000 People, FY 2001-2010
Figure 2-2. Average Program Attendance at Public Library Programs: Total Programs and Children’s Programs by Locality, FY 2010
3. Public Library Revenue
Figure 3-1. Trends in the Percentage of Operating Revenue by Local and State Sources, FY 2001-2010
Figure 3-2. State Map of Revenue Per Capita, FY 2010
4. Public Library Expenditures
Figure 4-1. Public Library Operating Revenue and Expenditures Per Capita, FY 2001-2010
Figure 4-2. Public Library Operating Revenue and Expenditures Per Capita by Locality, FY 2010
# Section 2: Resources
5. Circulation Per Capita
Figure 5-1. Trends in Circulation Per Capita, FY 2001-2010 Figure 5-2. State Map of Circulation Per Capita, FY 2010
6\. Collections – Non-print Materials Figure 6-1. Non-print Materials Per 1,000 People, FY 2001-2010 Figure 6-2. Number of eBooks Per 1,000 People by Region, FY 2003-2010
7\. Access to Technology Figure 7-1. Internet PCs Per 5,000 People and PC Uses Per Capita, FY 2001-2010 Figure 7-2. Internet PCs Per 5,000 People by Locality, FY 2010 Figure 7-3. PC Uses Per Capita by Locality, FY 2010
# Section 3: Workforce
8. Total Public Library Staff
Figure 8-1. Number of FTE Staff by Type, FY 2001-2010
Figure 8-1. Number of FTE Staff by Region, FY 2010
Figure 8-2. Staffing Expenditures: Salaries and Benefits, FY 2001-2010
Figure 9-1. Percentage of Libraries with ALA-degreed Librarians and Librarians with ALA-MLS Degrees, FY 2001-2010
Figure 9-2. Percentage of Libraries with ALA-degreed Librarians and Librarians with ALA-MLS Degrees by Locality, FY 2010
# The National Picture
Although the effects of the U.S. recession were felt locally in the year prior, Fiscal Year 2010 (FY 2010) was the first time the effects of the recession became evident at a national level. Public libraries experienced losses both in revenue and in the workforce. Despite these reductions, public libraries still maintained service levels in visitation and circulation. In addition, they have continued to add to their electronic resources, especially e-books, allowing them to expand their reach geographically.
# Public Libraries
Figure A: Public Libraries in the United States by Locale
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services. Projection: Albers Equal Area Conic.
# Public Library Funding
Operating Revenue
Total operating revenue for public libraries was $$ 1230$ billion in FY 2010 (Figure B), falling for the first time in 10 years, most likely a result of budget cuts from the recession. From FY 2009 to 2010, total revenue decreased by $$ 407.79$ million, a 3.5 percent decrease after adjusting for inflation.5 Revenue per capita was $$ 37.97$ , which reflected a 1-year decrease of 3.9 percent, but a 10-year increase of 3.1 percent from FY 2001.
Over 10 years (FY 2001 to 2010), there have been changes in the distribution of revenue sources for public libraries. Although most of the revenue for public libraries has come from local government streams, the proportion of total revenue coming from local government has increased. In FY 2010, revenue from local government accounted for 84.8 percent of total revenue, which is an increase of 9.7 percent since FY 2001. In contrast, revenue from state government was 7.1 percent of total revenue, which is a 10-year decrease of 44.6 percent.
Revenue from local governments accounted for $$ 9.58$ billion in FY 2010, a decrease of $$ 269.09$ million (2.7 percent) from FY 2009. However, revenue from local government has increased over the long term, exhibiting a 10-year increase of $$ 1.83$ billion, which is an increase of 23.5 percent after adjusting for inflation. In contrast, revenue from state government has steadily decreased since FY 2001. Revenues from state government accounted for $$ 799.41$ million, a decrease of $$ 83.17$ million (9.4 percent) from FY 2009 and an overall 10-year decrease of $$ 481.40$ million (37.6 percent) since FY 2001.
Public libraries received $$ 52.30$ million in revenue from the federal government, an increase of $$ 5.19$ million (11.0 percent) from FY 2009. Other sources of revenue, including donations, provided $$ 863.45$ million of total revenue. This was a 1-year decrease of $$ 60.74$ million (6.6 percent). Revenue from the federal government and other sources has decreased over the prior 10 years. In FY 2010, federal government revenue was 0.5 percent and other revenue was 7.6 percent of total revenue, decreases of 19.3 percent and 18.5 percent, respectively.
Figure B: US Public Library Revenue and Expenditures: Total Operating Revenue and Expenditures, FY 2001-2010 (in constant 2010 dollars)
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2001-2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
# Operating Expenditures
Total operating expenditures for public libraries were $$ 10.77$ billion in FY 2010, a decrease of $$ 285.20$ million from FY 2009, a 1-year decrease of 2.6 percent after adjusting for inflation. This was the first year of decreased expenditures since FY 2001, with an overall 10-year increase of 16.5 percent. Per capita spending at public libraries was $$ 36.18$ in FY 2010, reflecting a decrease of 3.0 percent since FY 2009, but a 10-year increase of 6.7 percent.
Most of the spending in public libraries goes to staffing expenses, which accounted for $$ 7.21$ billion (67.0 percent) of total expenditures in FY 2010. Staff-related expenditures decreased by 2.0 percent from the prior year. These decreases are related to reductions in the public library workforce, which decreased by 3.2 percent from FY 2009 to 2010.
The composition of staffing expenses has changed from FY 2001 to 2010, with a change in the proportion of salary to benefit expenses. In FY 2010, salary-related expenditures were $$ 5.43$ billion, which accounted for 75.3 percent of staffing expenditures; benefits-related expenditures were $$ 1.78$ million. Over the prior 10 years, benefits-related expenses changed from 18.8 percent in FY 2001 to 24.7 percent in 2010, reflecting the stress that external factors, such as rising healthcare costs,6 have put on staffing at public libraries.
Expenditures on collections were $$ 1.26$ billion in FY 2010, a decrease of $$ 66.56$ million (5.0 percent) from FY 2009. Collections expenditures, which comprised 11.7 percent of all operating expenses in FY 2010, have decreased over the prior 10 years by 10.4 percent. Expenditures on electronic materials, which were 1.4 percent of operating expenses, were $$ 155.75$ million in FY 2010. Although this was a decrease of $$ 3.07$ mil
FISCAL YEAR 2010
lion (1.9 percent) from FY 2009, it is also an increase of 52.7 percent since FY 2003, the first time this information was collected. This overall increase illustrates the changing face of library collections and services, with libraries meeting the public’s need for access to computing and digital materials.
# Public Library Services
Public libraries provide valuable services to the people in their legal service areas. They provide opportunities for learning to patrons across the lifespan and across different cultural and socioeconomic backgrounds. Although most programs are offered at the local libraries, many libraries have outreach programs to bring resources into classrooms and to underserved areas.
There were 1.57 billion visits to public libraries during FY 2010. Although this was down by 16.76 million (1.1 percent) from FY 2009, the first time visitation has decreased since FY 2001, it is a 10-year increase of 32.7 percent. Similarly, per capita physical visits to libraries showed a decrease from the prior year7. Overall, individuals within a legal service area visited the public library an average of 5.28 times, a decrease of 1.5 percent from FY 2009, but an overall 10-year increase of 21.7 percent.
Public libraries were open an average of 40.3 hours per week in FY 2010. This includes services by branches and bookmobiles, so hours open ranged from an annual total of 42 hours (0.8 hours per week) to 6,132 hours (117.9 hours per week). The hours open in FY 2010 reflect a 1-year decrease of 1.7 percent from FY 2009.
Public libraries offered 3.75 million programs to the public in FY 2010, an increase of 44.6 percent since FY 2004, the first year these data were recorded in this survey. Participation in these programs reached 86.64 million, a 6-year increase of 28.8 percent. There were 12.61 programs offered per 1,000 people, a 6-year increase of 37.4 percent. Average attendance at programs at public libraries was 23.09 people per program, a decrease of 11.0 percent since FY 2004. When programs have lower attendance, each participant can get more individual attention. The increase in overall attendance suggests that demand for these programs continues to increase. The increase in the number of programs, along with the smaller class sizes indicated by the decrease in average attendance, suggests that public libraries are meeting the demands of the general public by offering more programs.
Children’s programs accounted for the majority (61.5 percent) of all public library programs in FY 2010. Libraries offered 2.31 million programs for children, an increase of 21.9 percent since FY 2005, the first year this information was collected. Attendance at children’s programs reached 60.50 million, a 10-year increase of 17.2 percent. There were 7.75 children’s programs offered per 1,000 people. Average attendance at children’s programs increased to 26.24 children per program, a 1-year increase of 1.1 percent.
Programming for young adults was first reported in FY 2009. In FY 2010, young adult programs comprised 7.9 percent of all programs reported. There were 294,990 programs offered for young adults at public libraries, with attendance of 4.91 million. Based on libraries that reported young adult programming for both years8, the number of young adult programs increased by 6.3 percent, and attendance at these programs increased by 2.8 percent. Average attendance at programs for young adults was 16.64 people per program.
# Access to Computers and the Internet
Public libraries provided the general public with access to 244,842 Internet-ready computer terminals in FY 2010. This is an increase of 5.8 percent since FY 2009, and a doubling of access over the 10 years since FY 2001. Overall, public libraries provide 4.1 computers per 5,000 people in their legal service areas. There were 367.80 million user-sessions on these computers, an increase of 10.1 percent since FY 2006, the first time this metric was reported. There were 234.11 computer uses per 1,000 visits to public libraries, a 1-year increase of 1.7 percent.
FISCAL YEAR 2010
# Public Library Workforce
Public library services were supported by 139,370 fulltime equivalent (FTE)9 staff in FY 2010 (Figure C). This reflects a 1-year decrease of 3.2 percent, but a 10-year increase of 4.8 percent. One-third of total library staff (46,849) held positions with the title of librarian in FY 2010, providing 3.9 FTE per 25,000 people within library service areas, a decrease of 2.5 percent from FY 2009. Other paid staff (66.4 percent) totaled 92,521, providing 11.7 FTE per 25,000 people within library service areas. These staff supported library services at all levels in a wide variety of positions, including library paraprofessionals who serve as library clerks and technicians as well as staff who provide operational support, such as maintenance, security, IT and general administration. Total other paid staff decreased 3.7 percent from FY 2009, but showed a 10-year increase of 4.4 percent.
Figure C: US Public Library - Number of FTE Staff by Type, FY 2001-2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
FISCAL YEAR 2010
# Circulating the Collection
The service that people most closely associate with public libraries is access to collections. People use library materials for information, inspiration and entertainment. Public libraries provide exemplary stewardship of a wide array of materials in different formats, including books, audio recordings, videos and digital materials. Public libraries also facilitate the use of technology as a medium to access this information. Recently, libraries have leveraged the flexibility of digital materials, particularly e-books, as a way to expand the reach of their collection.
Circulation has continued to increase. Public libraries circulated 2.46 billion materials in FY 2010, a 1-year increase of 2.1 percent and a 10-year increase of 38.0 percent. Circulation per capita was 8.3, an increase of 26.4 percent over 10 years. Circulation per 1,000 visits was 1,567.2, an increase of 4.0 percent over 10 years. Circulation of children’s materials comprised 34.0 percent of total circulation, at 837.12 million materials. This reflects an increase of 2.7 percent since FY 2009 and a 10-year increase of 28.3 percent.
There were 171.07 million people10 who were registered to borrow materials from public libraries in FY 2010. This is an increase of 1.0 percent from FY 2009 and an increase of 6.0 percent since FY 2006, the first year these data were recorded in the survey.
# Collections
Audio and video materials continued to increase in FY 2010. There were 55.05 million total audio materials, both physical and downloadable11, which include music and audio books. This was a 1-year increase of 4.3 percent and a 10-year increase of 61.2 percent. There were 53.21 million total video materials, both physical and downloadable. This was a 1-year increase of 5.0 percent and a 10-year increase of 112.4 percent.
# Public Libraries Survey: Indicators
# Section 1. Public Library Services & Operations
Indicator 1. Public Library Visitation Per Capita Indicator 2. Library Programs for Children, Youth and Adults Indicator 3. Sources of Public Library Revenue Indicator 4. Change in Public Library Operating Expenditures
# Indicator 1. Public Library Visitation Per Capita
While physical visits to library buildings decreased for the first time in 10 years from the prior year, visitation still remains strong with an overall 10- year increase of 32.7 percent. On average, Americans visited a public library 5.3 times per year, a 10-year increase of 21.7 percent. Although the national visitation rate is down slightly from 2009, the story at the state level is mixed, with most states showing a decrease, but some having increases.
Figure 1-1: Revenue Per Capita, Hours Open Per Week, and Visits Per Capita, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services.
# Indicator 1. Public Library Visitation Per Capita
Visitation per capita was significantly higher for libraries in suburban areas than in any of the other locale types. In FY 2010, visitation per capita in suburban libraries was 5.8 visits; in city libraries it was 5.2; in town libraries it was 4.7; and in rural libraries it was 4.7. Suburban libraries did not see an increase in visitation per capita from FY 2009. Rather, these differences are the result of decreasing visitation in libraries in cities and rural areas, specifically in large cities (decrease of 3.8 percent) and distant rural (decrease of 6.4 percent) public libraries.
Visitation per capita varied by state in FY 2010, as seen in Figure 1-2. The states with the highest rates of visitation per capita were New Hampshire (8.2), Ohio (7.6), Connecticut (7.2), and Wyoming (7.1). The lowest rates were in Mississippi (3.3), Tennessee (3.4), West Virginia (3.4), and Texas (3.4). Twenty-three states saw an increase in visitation per capita from FY 2009. States with the highest percent change were New Hampshire (increase of 37.9 percent), Louisiana (6.6 percent), and New Mexico (5.2 percent). States with the highest decreases in visitation per capita were Oklahoma (decrease of 26.1 percent), Hawaii (11.7 percent), and Georgia (9.7 percent).
Figure 1-2: Visits per Capita, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services. Projection: Albers Equal Area Conic.
Public libraries offered 3.75 million programs to the public in FY 2010, or an average of at least 1 program per day for every library system in the country. The majority of these programs (61.5 percent) are designed for children. Attendance at programs has continued to increase, indicating an increased demand for these services.
Public libraries offered 3.75 million programs to the public in FY 2010, an increase of 44.6 percent since FY 2004, the first year this information was collected. Attendance at these programs reached 86.64 million, a 6-year increase of 28.8 percent. There were 12.61 programs offered per 1,000 people (Figure 2-1). There was a moderate, but significant, relationship between per capita expenditures and the number of programs offered and program attendance.1
Figure 2-1: US Public Library – Programs Per 1,000 People, FY 2001-2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2001-2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
# Indicator 2. Library Programs for Children, Youth and Adults
There were also regional differences in programming. As a region, New England offered significantly more programs per capita (21.8 per 1,000 people) than other regions, with a 1-year increase of 5.5 percent. The Southeast (9.5 per 1,000) and Southwest (8.6 per 1,000) offered significantly fewer programs. Regional differences reflected state-level differences, as well. Vermont (40.4), New Hampshire (37.1), and Maine (27.2) offered the highest number of programs per 1,000 people. The fewest programs relative to population were offered in Tennessee (5.8), Georgia (6.1), and Hawaii (6.7).
Children’s programs accounted for the majority (61.5 percent) of all public library programs in FY 2010. Libraries offered 2.31 million programs for children, an increase of 21.9 percent since FY 2005, the first year this information was collected. In FY 2010, programs for young adult comprised 7.9 percent of all programs reported. There were 294,990 programs offered for young adults2 at public libraries, with attendance of 4.91 million.
In FY 2010, there were 7.75 children’s programs offered per 1,000 people. Programs for children mirrored the pattern of overall programming across locales. Libraries in rural areas offered 10.7 children’s programs per 1,000 people, the highest ratio; libraries in cities offered 6.3, the lowest. Public libraries in suburban areas (7.8) and towns (8.7) were similar to the national rate of 7.7 per 1,000 people.
Average attendance at all programs at public libraries was 23.09 people per program, a decrease of 11.0 percent since FY 2004. Smaller average program attendance allows for attendees to get more individualized attention at each program. The increase in both the number of programs and overall attendance, coupled with decreasing average program attendance, suggests that public libraries are meeting the demands of the general public by offering more programs.
Attendance at children’s programs reached 60.50 million, a 10-year increase of 17.2 percent. Although the number of programs for children and attendance at these programs decreased from the levels recorded in FY 2009, neither of these decreases was significant. Average attendance at children’s programs increased to 26.2 children per program, a 1-year increase of 1.1 percent.
Figure 2-2: US Public Library – Programs by Locale Average Program Attendance, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services.
# Indicator 3. Sources of Public Library Revenue
Total operating revenue for public libraries was $$ 1230$ billion in FY 2010 (Figure B on page 9), falling for the first time in 10 years, most likely a result of budget cuts from the recession. From FY 2009 to 2010, total revenue decreased by $$ 407.79$ million, a 3.5 percent decrease after adjusting for inflation.1 Revenue per capita was $$ 37.97$ , which reflected a 1-year decrease of 3.9 percent, but a 10-year increase of 3.1 percent from FY 2001.
Over 10 years (FY 2001 to 2010), there have been changes in the distribution of revenue sources for public libraries (Figure 3-1). Although most of the revenue for public libraries has come from local government streams, the proportion of total revenue coming from local government has increased. In FY 2010, revenue from local government accounted for 84.8 percent of total revenue, an increase of 9.7 percent since FY 2001. In contrast, revenue from state government was 7.1 percent of total revenue, a 10-year decrease of 44.6 percent.
Revenue from local governments accounted for $$ 9.58$ billion in FY 2010, a decrease of $$ 269.09$ million (2.7
Figure 3-1: Percentage of US Public Library Operating Revenue ce, FY 2001-2010 (Labels are Revenue in Billions, Constant 2010 Dollars)
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2001-2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
# Indicator 3. Sources of Public Library Revenue
percent) from FY 2009. However, revenue from local government has increased over the long term, exhibiting a 10-year increase of $$ 1.83$ billion, an increase of 23.5 percent after adjusting for inflation. In contrast, revenue from state government has steadily decreased since FY 2001. Revenues from state government accounted for $$ 799.41$ million, a decrease of $$ 83.17$ million (9.4 percent) from FY 2009 and an overall 10-year decrease of $$ 481.40$ million (37.6 percent) since FY 2001.
There were significant differences across locales for revenue per capita. The largest decrease in revenue per capita occurred in libraries in cities. Revenue per capita for city libraries was $$ 39.09$ in FY 2010, a decrease of 6.5 percent from the prior year. The largest decreases were seen in large cities (decrease of 9.8 percent). Even though there was a 1-year decrease of 3.1 percent, revenue per capita for suburban libraries in FY 2010 remained the highest at $$ 43.65$ . Lowest revenues were in town and rural libraries, at $$ 28.13$ and $$ 29.70$ , respectively, both of which were lower than the national revenue per capita of $$ 37.97$ .
Revenue per capita for public libraries varied across states (Figure 3-2). Despite having one of the largest decreases in revenues (12.9 percent), the District of Columbia has the highest revenue per capita $$ 68.15)$ .
Figure 3-2: Revenue Per Capita, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services. Projection: Albers Equal Area Conic.
# Indicator 3. Sources of Public Library Revenue
Revenue per capita was also highest in Illinois $( $ 65.23)$ , Ohio $$ 59.75)$ , and New Jersey $$ 59.12)$ . States with the lowest revenue per capita were Mississippi $( $ 16.29)$ , Tennessee $$ 16.65)$ , and Texas $$ 19.54)$ . Thirty-seven states saw a decrease in their per capita public library revenues. In addition to the
District, the largest percent decreases were in New York (14.3 percent) and Georgia (11.5 percent). Despite the effects of the recession, 14 states did see increases in revenue per capita. The largest percent increases were in New Hampshire (29.4 percent) and Louisiana (17.2 percent).
# Technical Notes
# Indicator 4. Change in Public Library Operating Expenditures
Public libraries reported operating expenditures of $10.77 billion in FY 2010, the first decrease since FY 2001. Although expenditures across all U.S. public libraries were $36.18 per capita, per capita expenditures varied across states. State-level expenditures ranged from almost $60 to less than $20 per capita.
Total operating expenditures in public libraries were $$ 10.77$ billion in FY 2010, a decrease of $$ 285.20$ million from FY 2009, and a 1-year decrease of 2.6 percent after adjusting for inflation. This was the first year of decreased expenditures since FY 2001, with an overall 10-year increase of 16.5 percent. Per capita spending at public libraries was $$ 36.18$ in FY 2010, reflecting a decrease of 3.0 percent since FY 2009, but a 10-year increase of 6.7 percent (Figure 4-1).
Highest per capita expenditures were found in the District of Columbia $$ 67.78)$ , and states of Illinois $$ 59.46$ , and New York $$ 58.01$ ). States with the lowest per capita expenditures were Mississippi $( $ 15.99)$ , Tennessee $$ 16.17)$ , and West Virginia $$ 18.04$ . Thir
Figure 4-1: US Public Library Revenue and Expenditures: Per Capita Operating Revenue and Per Capita Expenditures, FY 2001-2010 (in constant 2010 dollars)
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2001-2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
# Indicator 4. Change in Public Library Operating Expenditures
and Georgia (decrease of 12.3 percent); the largest increases were in New Hampshire (increase of 30.6 percent) and Louisiana (increase of 6.8 percent).
Figure 4-2: US Public Library – Per Capita Operating Revenue and Expenditure by Locale, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services.
# Public Libraries Survey: Indicators
# Section 2. Public Library Resources
Indicator 5. Circulation of Public Libraries Indicator 6. Change in Public Library Collections Indicator 7. Computers and the Internet
# Indicator 5. Circulation in Public Libraries
# Public libraries circulation continues to increase with 2.46 billion materials circulated in FY 2010, the highest circulation in 10 years. Circulation of children’s materials has increased by 28.3 percent in the last 10 years and comprises over one-third of all materials circulated in public libraries.
Public libraries circulated 2.46 billion materials in FY 2010, a 1-year increase of 2.1 percent and a 10-year increase of 38.0 percent (Figure 5-1). Circulation per capita was 8.3, an increase of 26.4 percent over 10 years. Circulation per 1,000 visits was 1,567.2, an increase of 4.0 percent over 10 years. Circulation of children’s materials comprised 34.0 percent of total circulation, at 837.12 million materials. This reflects an increase of 2.7 percent since FY 2009 and a 10-year increase of 28.3 percent. There was a strong, positive relationship between circulation per capita and expenditures on collections.1
Figure 5-1: US Public Library – Circulation Per Capita, FY 2001-2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2001-2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
# Indicator 5. Circulation in Public Libraries
Great Lakes, circulation was 12.2 overall and 4.0 for children’s materials. The New England region, with a circulation per capita of 9.7, saw the highest annual increase (8.2 percent). The lowest rates of circulation per capita were in the Southeast (6.1 total, 2.0 children’s) and Southwest (6.0 total, 2.1 children’s). The percent of total circulation that was children’s material ranged from 32.5 to 36.3 percent per region.
Figure 5-2: Circulation Per Capita, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services. Projection: Albers Equal Area Conic.
# Indicator 6. Change in Public Library Collections
The complexion of collections in public libraries has been changing over the past several years, reflecting changes that have taken place in digital media and technology as a whole. Although the majority of collection materials remain books in print (87.1 percent of the total collection in FY 2010), this proportion has decreased over the prior 10 years.
Non-print materials in public library collections, including audio and video materials in both physical and downloadable formats, and electronic books (e-books), have increased dramatically since FY 2001 (Figure 6-1). There were 55.05 million total audio materials, both physical and downloadable1, which include music and audio books. This was a 1-year increase of 4.3 percent and a 10-year increase of 61.2 percent. There were 53.21 million total video materials, both physical and downloadable. This was a 1-year increase of 5.0 percent and a 10-year increase of 112.4 percent. The fastest growth in non-print materials has been in e-book holdings. In FY 2010, there were 18.50 million electronic books (e-books) available for circulation, a 1-year increase of 22.5 percent. E-book volume has increased by 323.5 percent since 2003, the first time this metric was collected in the survey.
Figure 6-1: Public Library Collections: Non-print Materials Per 1,000 People, FY 2001-2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2001-2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
# Indicator 6. Change in Public Library Collections
Expenditures on collections totaled $$ 1.26$ billion in FY 2010, a decrease of $$ 66.56$ million (5.0 percent) from FY 2009. Collection expenditures, which comprised 11.7 percent of all operating expenses in FY 2010, decreased over the prior 10 years by 10.4 percent. Expenditures on electronic materials, which were 1.4 percent of operating expenses, were $$ 155.75$ million in FY 2010. Although this was a decrease of 1.9 percent from the prior year, it was also an increase of 52.7 percent since FY 2003, the first time this information was collected. States varied on their per capita expenditures on electronic materials, from $$ 1.47$ in Washington to $$ 0.11$ in Mississippi.
Figure 6-2: US Public Library – Number of eBooks Per 1,000 People by Region, FY 2001-2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
# Indicator 7. Computers and the Internet
Providing public access computers continued to be one of the fastest growing services in public libraries. In FY 2010, public libraries reported a computer use rate of more than one use for every five visits to the library. Public libraries have responded to demand by increasing access, doubling the number of computers in the past 10 years.
Public libraries provided the general public with access to 244,842 Internet-ready computer terminals in FY 2010 (Figure 7-1). This is an increase of 5.8 percent since FY 2009 and a 10-year increase of 100.5 percent. Overall, this is 4.1 computers per 5,000 people in the legal service areas for public libraries. There were 367.80 million user-sessions on these computers, an increase of 10.1 percent since FY 2006, the first time this metric was reported. There were 234.11 computer uses per 1,000 visits to public libraries, a 1-year increase of 1.7. There was a strong relationship between computer uses per capita and visits per capita.1
Figure 7-1: US Public Library – Internet PCs Per 5,000 People and PC Uses Per Capita, FY 2001-2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2001-2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistics.
# Indicator 7. Computers and the Internet
Libraries in suburban and rural areas saw increases in the number of computer uses per 1,000 visits (Figure
Figure 7-2: US Public Library – Internet PCs Per 5,000 People by Locale, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services.
Figure 7-3: US Public Library – PC Uses Per 1,000 Visits by Locale, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services.
# Public Libraries Survey: Indicators
Section 3. Public Library Workforce
# Indicator 8. Public Library Staffing
Public library services were supported by 139,370 full-time equivalent1 staff in FY 2010 (Figure C on page 11). This reflects a 1-year decrease of 3.2 percent, but a 10-year increase of 4.8 percent. One-third of total library staff (46,849) held positions with the title of librarian in FY 2010, providing 3.9 FTEs per 25,000 people within library service areas, a decrease of 2.5 percent from FY 2009. Other paid staff (66.4 percent) totaled 92,521, providing 11.7 FTEs per 25,000
people within library service areas. These staff supported library services at all levels in a wide variety of positions, including library paraprofessionals who serve as library clerks and technicians, as well as staff who provide operational support such as maintenance, security, IT, and general administration. Total other paid staff decreased 3.7 percent from FY 2009, but showed a 10-year increase of 4.4 percent.
There were no significant differences across locales in the number of total staff per capita. However, all locales experience decreases in their workforce, and there were differences in the magnitude of these losses. Libraries in cities and suburbs lost the most, with decreases of 5.2 percent and 4.1 percent, respectively. This was above the national decrease of 3.6 percent.
Figure 8-1: US Public Library – Number of FTE Staff Per 25,000 People by Region, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services.
# Indicator 8. Public Library Staffing
and 8.7, respectively. As with the locales, there were also differences in the magnitude of change from FY 2009. The greatest workforce loss was in the Mideast, with a 1-year decrease of 6.3 percent. The Far West (decrease of 4.5 percent) and Southeast (decrease of 3.6 percent) also saw significant change from the prior year. Wyoming (21.1) and New Hampshire (20.7) have the largest workforce per 25,000 people; Tennessee (7.1) and Georgia (7.5) have the smallest.
Most of the spending in public libraries goes to staffing expenses, which accounted for $$ 7.21$ billion (67.0 percent) of total expenditures in FY 2010. This reflected a decrease of $$ 150.61$ million (2.0 percent) from the prior year. The composition of staffing expenses has changed from FY 2001 to 2010, with a change in the proportion of salary to benefit expenses (Figure 8-2). In FY 2010, salary-related expenditures were $$ 5.43$
billion, which accounted for 75.3 percent of staffing expenditures; benefits-related expenditures were $$ 1.78$ million. Over the prior 10 years, benefits-related expenses changed from 18.8 percent in FY 2001 to 24.7 percent in 2010, reflecting the stress that rising healthcare costs have put on staffing at public libraries.
Many things influence per capita spending on public library staffing, including the number of staff, the service area, and the cost of living. The percentage of operating expenditures that were spent on staffing ranged from 58.3 percent in Louisiana to 73.2 percent in New Hampshire. The highest per capita expenditures on staffing were found in the District of Columbia $$ 43.94)$ , New York $$ 41.58)$ , and Wyoming $$ 40.40)$ . States with the lowest spending were Mississippi $$ 10.78)$ , Tennessee $( $ 12.03)$ , and West Virginia $$ 1232)$ .
Figure 8-2: US Public Library Staff Expenditures: Salaries and Benefits (in constant 2010 dollars), FY 2001-2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistic
# Indicator 9. Librarians
# Librarians made up one-third of all library staff. Although the majority of these librarians hold a Master’s degree in Library and Information Studies from a program accredited by the American Library Association (ALA-MLS), only half of all libraries reported having a librarian with an ALA-MLS on staff.
There were 46,849 employees who held the title of librarian working at public libraries in FY 2010, which accounted for one-third (33.6 percent) of all library staff. Overall, this provides 3.94 librarians per 25,000 people, a decrease of 2.5 percent from FY 2009.
Figure 9-1: US Public Library – Libraries with ALA-degreed Librarian and Librarians with ALA-MLS Degrees, FY 2001-2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2001-2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services/National Center for Education Statistic
# Indicator 9. Librarians
There were large differences in the percentage of libraries with ALA-MLS degreed librarians on staff by locale.
Almost all (99.0 percent) public libraries in cities have ALA-MLS degreed librarians on staff. In contrast, only 23.9 percent of rural libraries have an ALA-MLS librarian on staff. These levels have remained fairly stable over the past 10 years. There are also regional differences in the percentages of libraries that have ALA-MLS degreed librarians on staff, ranging from 21.0 percent in the Plains to 68.7 in the Far West. As with the locale trend, these percentages have changed little since FY 2001. The District of Columbia and four states report that all libraries have a librarian with an ALA-accredited MLS on staff: the District of Columbia, Georgia, Hawaii, Maryland, and Rhode Island. States with the fewest libraries with an ALA-MLS librarian on staff are North Dakota (11.0 percent), Nebraska (13.9 percent), and Iowa (16.6 percent).
Figure 9-2: US Public Library Staffing by Locale Percent of Libraries and Librarians with ALA-MLS, FY 2010
Source: Public Library Survey, FY 2010, Institute of Museum and Library Services.
# Public Libraries Survey: Appendix
Appendix B – Technical Notes Note 1. Commonly Used Measures Note 2. Adjusting for Inflation: Financial Indicators and Calculations Note 3. Public Libraries in the United States Survey, FY 2010
FISCAL YEAR 2010
The Public Libraries Survey (PLS) is a voluntary survey conducted annually by the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS). IMLS collects these data under the mandate in the Museum and Library Services Act of 2003, as stated in SEC. 210. The U.S. Census Bureau is the data collection agent for IMLS. The fiscal year (FY) 2010 survey is the 23rd in the series.
# Survey Purpose and Data Items Included in This Report
The PLS provides a national census of public libraries and their public service outlets (see Key Library Terminology below). These data are useful to federal, state, and local policymakers; library and public policy researchers; and the public, journalists, and others.
The PLS is designed as a universe survey. The survey frame consists of 9,299 public libraries (9,241 public libraries in the 50 states and the District of Columbia and 58 public libraries in the outlying areas of Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands), as identified by state library agencies. Public libraries in one outlying area, American Samoa, are not included in the survey frame because their state library agency has never responded to the request for participation in the survey.
The survey frame includes 290 public libraries that do not meet all the criteria in the FSCS Public Library Definition (see item 203 of the Administrative Entity definitions for the criteria). These libraries are included in the data files because they qualify as public libraries under state law. However, beginning with the FY 2010 report, the 290 non-FSCS libraries are excluded from the tables for a total of 8,951 public libraries in the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
A total of 9,100 of the 9,299 public libraries in the survey frame responded to the FY 2010 PLS (including Guam, Puerto Rico, and the non-FSCS libraries), for a unit response rate of 97.9 percent. Item response rates are included in the tables in this report.2 The data were submitted over the Internet via a web-based reporting system. (See Data Collection in Appendix B, Note 3, for more information.)
# Congressional Authorization
Two separate laws cover protection of the confidentiality of individually identifiable information collected by the Institute of Museum and Library Services - the Privacy Act of 1974 and the E-Government Act of 2002. The Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of Information Disseminated by the Institute of Museum and Library Services are prepared under the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2001, Section 515(b).
IMLS will fulfill the congressional mandate in the Museum and Library Services Act of 2003 as stated in Section 210. Analysis of Impact of Museum and Library Services:
(2) shall identify national needs for, and trends of…
library services provided with funds made available
under subtitles B and C…
IMLS library survey activities will be designed to address high-priority library data needs; provide consistent, reliable, complete, and accurate indicators of the status and trends of state and public libraries; and report timely, useful, and high-quality data to the U.S. Congress, the States, other education policymakers, practitioners, data users, and the general public.
FISCAL YEAR 2010
# Key Library Terminology3
• Public library. A public library is an entity that is established under state enabling laws or regulations to serve a community, district, or region, and that provides at least the following: (1) an organized collection of printed or other library materials, or a combination thereof; (2) paid staff; (3) an established schedule in which services of the staff are available to the public; (4) the facilities necessary to support such a collection, staff, and schedule; and (5) is supported in whole or in part with public funds.
• Administrative entity. An administrative entity is the agency that is legally established under local or state law to provide public library service to the population of a local jurisdiction. The administrative entity may have a single public library service outlet, or it may have more than one public library service outlet. (Note: In this report, the term public library means an administrative entity.)
• Public library service outlet. Public libraries can have one or more outlets that provide direct service to the public. The three types of public library service outlets included in this report are central library outlets, branch library outlets, and bookmobile outlets. Information on a fourth type of outlet, books-by-mail-only outlets, was collected but omitted from this report because these outlets are not open to the public. The four outlet types are defined in the Data File Documentation (Appendix F in item 709 of the definitions).
# Supplemental Tables
# Survey Questionnaire and Data Elements
# History of the Public Libraries Survey
In 1985, the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) and the American Library Association (ALA) conducted a pilot project in 15 states to assess the feasibility of a federal-state cooperative program for the collection of public library data. The project was jointly funded by NCES and the U.S. Department of Education’s former Library Programs (LP) office. In 1987, the project’s final report recommended the development of a nationwide data collection system. The Hawkins-Stafford Elementary and Secondary School Improvement Amendments of 1988 (P.L. 100-297) charged NCES with developing a voluntary Federal-State Cooperative System (FSCS) for the annual collection of public library data.4 To carry out this mandate, a task force was formed by NCES and the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science (NCLIS), and the FSCS was established in 1988.
The first survey report in this series, Public Libraries in 50 States and the District of Columbia: 1989, which included data from 8,699 public libraries in 50 states and the District of Columbia, was released by NCES in 1991. A data file and survey report have been released annually since then. The states have always submitted their data electronically, via customized personal computer survey software through FY 2004, and via a web-based application beginning in FY 2005.
On October 1, 2007 the survey was transferred from NCES to IMLS. The FY 2006 survey was collected by NCES and released by IMLS. The FY 2010 survey is the fourth PLS data collection and release by IMLS.
# Appendix B. Technical Notes
FISCAL YEAR 2010
# Note 1. Commonly Used Measures
In this report we present statistics for metrics related to aspects of financial, operational, and service activities in public libraries in the United States. National level summaries of these metrics are presented for FY 2010, and 10-year trends are presented for many metrics from FY 2001 through FY 2010. Some data elements, such as the number of children’s programs offered, were added to the survey more recently. For analyses of these metrics, changes were reported based on the fiscal year in which the data element was introduced. In the indicators, metrics are also broken out and presented by state, region, or locality.
# Per Capita
Federal agencies use various approaches to classify community types. In this report, libraries were classified using a system of locale codes developed by the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). Working with the U.S. Census Bureau, NCES revised these codes by using improved geocoding technology and the 2000 Office of Management and Budget (OMB) definitions of metro areas. Thus, the locale codes rely on proximity to an urbanized area, rather than population size and county boundaries.
The locale code system classifies a territory into four major categories: urban, suburban, town, and rural (Table B-1-1). Each category has three sub-categories. For urban and suburban areas, gradations are based on population size: large, medium, or small. Towns and rural areas are sub-categorized based on their distance from an urbanized area: fringe, distant, or remote. The Census Bureau developed the coding methodology as a way to identify the location of public schools for the Common Core of Data, a survey collected by the National Center for Education Statistics.
These locale codes provide a new way to analyze library services in the United States. By incorporating objective measures of rurality and urbanicity into the data files, researchers and practitioners can benchmark services in a fundamentally different way by basing comparisons on community attributes, as well as the attributes of the libraries themselves. In other words, library services in rural remote areas can now be compared to library services in other rural remote areas within the same state or across the country by using a standardized rurality/ urbanicity metric that is applied consistently to each library in the country. Once communities of interest have been selected, comparisons can be made to any data that are available in the PLS, whether they are related to aspects of finance, operations, or service.
# Geographic Region
Analyses in this report are also presented by geographic region. The Public Libraries Survey uses the geographic regional classification developed by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The classification is comprised of eight geographic regions: New England, Mideast, Great Lakes, Plains, Southeast, Southwest, Rocky Mountains, and Far West (Figure B-1-1).
# Full Time Equivalent (FTE)
Table B-1-1: Urban-centric Locale Categories
|     |     |
| --- | --- |
| City | Large: Territory inside an urbanized area and inside a principal city with population of 250,000 or more |
| Midsize: Territory inside an urbanized area and inside a principal city with population less than 250,000 and greater than or equal to 100,000 |
| Small: Territory inside an urbanized area and inside a principal city with population less than 100,000 |
| Suburb less than 100,000 | Large: Territory outside a principal city and inside an urbanized area with population of 250,000 or more |
| Midsize: Territory outside a principal city and inside an urbanized area with population less than 250,000 and greater than or equal to 100,000 Small: Territory outside a principal city and inside an urbanized area with population |
| Town | Fringe: Territory inside an urban cluster that is less than or equal to 10 miles from an urbanized area |
| Distant: Territory inside an urban cluster that is more than 10 miles and less than or equal to 35 miles from an urbanized area Remote: Territory inside an urban cluster that is more than 35 miles from an |
| Rural | Fringe: Census-defined rural territory that is less than or equal to 5 miles from an urbanized area, as well as rural territory that is less than or equal to 2.5 miles from |
| an urban cluster Distant: Census-defined rural territory that is more than 5 miles but less than or equal to 25 miles from an urbanized area, as well as rural territory that is more than |
| 2.5 miles but less than or equal to 10 miles from an urban cluster Remote: Census-defined rural territory that is more than 25 miles from an urbanized area and is also more than 10 miles from an urban cluster |
Figure B-1-1: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis Regional Classifications
# Note 2. Adjusting for Inflation: Financial Indicators and Calculations
For financial trends that report dollar amounts over time, such as 10-year revenue trends, metrics are presented in constant dollars. Constant dollars are an adjusted value of currency that accounts for inflation. We use this adjustment in order to compare monetary values from one period to another. For the present analyses, inflation was accounted for using a GDP (gross domestic product) deflator,1 as shown in Equation 1 below.
# Equation 1:
\\mathsf { G D P ~ D e f l a t o r ~ = ~ \\frac { \\Gamma ( N o m i n a l ~ G D P ) } { ( R e a l ~ G D P ) } }
In general, a real value is one in which the effects of inflation have been taken into account, and a nominal value is one in which the effects have not. Thus, the Real GDP is the value of all the goods and services produced in the United States expressed relative to some base year, and the Nominal GDP is the value of the same goods and services expressed in current prices.
To calculate the value in constant dollars for a target year, multiply a value from a base year by a ratio of the GDP Deflators from the base year and the target year. For example, to calculate the amount of revenue from the year 2000 in 2009 constant dollars, multiply the original value of revenue in 2000 by the ratio of the deflators from year 2009 to 2000 (see Equation 2, below).
# Equation 2:
# Appendix B. Technical Notes
FISCAL YEAR 2010
# Note 3. Public Libraries in the United States Survey, FY 2010
# Survey Universe
The PLS is designed as a universe survey. The survey frame consists of 9,299 public libraries (9,241 public libraries in the 50 states and the District of Columbia and 58 public libraries in the outlying areas of Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands), as identified by state library agencies. (Public libraries in one outlying area, American Samoa, are not included in the survey frame because their state library agency has never responded to the request for participation in the survey. Because their public libraries have not been identified, they are not included in the response rate calculations.) The survey frame includes 290 public libraries that do not meet all the criteria in the FSCS Public Library Definition1 (see item 203 of the Administrative Entity definitions for the criteria). The non-FSCS libraries were included in the imputation process for nonresponse. These libraries are included in the data files because they qualify as public libraries under state law. However, beginning with the FY 2010 report, the 290 non-FSCS libraries are excluded from the tables, for a total of 8,951 public libraries in the 50 states and the District of Columbia. Military libraries that provide public library service and libraries that serve residents of institutions are not included.
# Survey Response
Unit response. A total of 9,100 of the 9,299 public libraries in the survey frame responded to the FY 2010 PLS (including Guam, Puerto Rico and the 290 non-FSCS libraries), for a unit response rate of 97.9 percent. For the 8,951 libraries in this report, the unit response rate was 98.7 percent. Public libraries are defined as respondents if they reported population of the legal service area and at least three of the five following items: total paid employees, total operating revenue, total operating expenditures, print materials, and total circulation. (Note: Some individual survey items, such as population of legal service area, service outlets, and type of legal basis have a 100.0 percent response rate for their state because the state library agency provided these data for all public libraries in its state.)
Total response. The base for calculating response rates to individual survey items is the total number of libraries in the survey frame, including unit non-respondents.
Data file and publication response rates. The total response rates in the data file differ from the total response rates in the published report. This is because the non-responding outlying areas of the Northern Mariana Islands and the Virgin Islands and the nonFSCS libraries are included in the data file but are not included in the publication. The responding outlying areas of Guam and Puerto Rico are included in the data file. However, only Guam is included in the publication, due to low response rates in Puerto Rico. The response rates for the outlying territories are not included in the national totals in the publication.
Reporting period. The FY 2010 PLS requested data for state fiscal year 2010. Most state fiscal years are either a calendar year or the period July-June. In some states, the FY reporting period varies among local jurisdictions. These states are listed in the Other column in Table B-3-1. Regardless, each public library provided data for a 12-month period. The FY starting date and ending date of each public library are included in the data file.
# Calculations Included in the Tables
Percentages rather than raw numbers are used in some tables to provide a clearer picture of data patterns. Percentage distributions may not sum to 100 due to rounding. To obtain a raw number from a percentage distribution table, multiply the percentage for the item by the total for the item. (The total may be in a different table.) For example, in Table 5, the number of public libraries in the 50 states and the District of Columbia with municipal government as their legal basis is 4,717 $( 8 , 9 5 1 \\times 0 . 5 2 7 .$ ). The percentages are rounded, so multiplying a percentage by a total may not give an exact count for a desired category.
Table B-3-1: Reporting Periods of Public Libraries: Fiscal Year 2010
|     |     |     |     |     |     |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | July 2009ThroughJune 2010 |  | January 2010hroughDecember 2010 |  |  |
|  | Other1 |
|  | Arizona |  | Arkansas |  | Alabama² |
|  | California |  | Colorado |  | Alaska³ |
|  | Connecticut |  | Indiana |  | District of Columbia² |
|  | Delaware |  | Kansas |  | Florida² |
|  | Georgia |  | Louisiana |  | Idaho² |
|  | Hawaii |  | Minnesota |  | Illinois11 |
|  | lowa |  | North Dakota |  | Maine |
|  | Kentucky |  | New Jersey |  | Michigan |
|  | Maryland |  | Ohio |  | Mississippi2 |
|  | Massachusetts |  | South Dakota |  | Missouri7 |
|  | Montana |  | Washington |  | Nebraska4 |
|  | Nevada |  | Wisconsin |  | New Hampshire8 |
|  | New Mexico |  | Puerto Rico | New York9 |
|  | North Carolina |  | cYanmaGlowb | Pennsylvania8 |
|  | Oklahoma | Texas10 |
|  | Oregon | Utah8 |
| Rhode Island Vermont4South Carolina Guam²TennesseeVirginiaWest VirginiaWyoming |
|  | Rhode Island |  |  |  |
| South Carolina |
# Appendix B. Technical Notes
FISCAL YEAR 2010
# Questionnaire
Library visits and reference transactions. Public libraries reported annual library visits and annual reference transactions based on actual counts, if available. Otherwise, annual estimates were provided based on a typical week in October, multiplied by 52.
Population items. The PLS has three population items: (1) Population of Legal Service Area for each public library, (2) Total Unduplicated Population of Legal Service Areas for each state, and (3) State Total Population Estimate. The population data are provided by the state library agency. The methods of calculation for the first two items vary significantly among states, and the state reporting periods also vary. The Total Unduplicated Population of Legal Service Areas does not include
unserved areas and may vary from data provided by sources using standard methodology (e.g., the Census Bureau).
To enable meaningful state comparisons using total Population of Legal Service Area data (for example, the number of print materials per capita), the Population of Legal Service Area data were adjusted to eliminate duplicative reporting due to overlapping service areas. The Public Library Data File includes a derived unduplicated population of legal service area figure for each library for this purpose (the variable is called POPU\_UND). This value was prorated for each library by calculating the ratio of a library’s Population of Legal Service Area to the state’s total Population of Legal Service Area and
Table B-3-2: States with Public Libraries with Overlapping Service Areas: Fiscal Year 2010
# Appendix B. Technical Notes
FISCAL YEAR 2010 applying the ratio to the state’s Total Unduplicated Population of Legal Service Areas. (The latter item is a single, state-reported figure found in the Public Library State Summary/State Characteristics Data File; the variable is called POPU\_UND in this file also.)
Paid Full-Time-Equivalent (FTE) Staff. Paid staff members were reported in FTEs (Table 17). To ensure comparable data, 40 hours was set as the measure of full-time employment (for example, 60 hours per week of part-time work by employees in a staff category, divided by the 40-hour measure, equals 1.50 FTEs). FTE data were reported to two decimal places (rounded to one decimal place in the tables).
# Data Collection
The FY 2010 PLS was released to the states over the Internet on December 8, 2010. States were placed into one of three reporting groups (with survey due dates of April 13, August 3, or August 24, 2011), based on their fiscal cycles or claim of extraordinary reporting hardship. States reported their data over the Internet via a web-based reporting system called WebPLUS (Web Public Library Universe System). The Census Bureau (the data collection agent) developed WebPLUS. IMLS completed editing follow-up in November of 2011. The editing process is described in the Editing section below.
State level. The respondent generates an edit report following direct data entry or import of their data into WebPLUS. The edit report, which can be viewed onscreen or printed, is used to identify and correct any errors, and to confirm the accuracy of data that generated edit warnings, but required no change, before submitting the final file to the Census Bureau. In the FY 2010 PLS, four types of edit checks were performed:
1. Relational edit checks.
2. Out-of-range edit checks.
3. Arithmetic edit checks.
4. Blank, zero, or invalid data edit checks.
For more information on edit checks, see the PLS FY 2010 Data Documentation.
The WebPLUS application generates state summary tables (showing state totals for all numeric data items) and single-library tables (showing data for individual public libraries in a state). The application also generates state item response tables. Respondents were encouraged to review the tables for data quality issues before submitting their data to IMLS. State data submissions also included a signed form from the Chief Officer of the State Library Agency certifying the accuracy of the data.
National level. The Census Bureau and IMLS reviewed and edited the state data submissions, working closely with the PLS State Data Coordinators.
# Imputation
Imputation is a procedure for estimating a value for a specific data item for which the response is missing. This section describes the imputation methods that were used to fill in the missing data items for the FY 2010 survey year. A total of 51 data items were imputed.
The responding and non-responding libraries were sorted into imputation cells based on OBE region code (Bureau of Economic Analysis region code, formerly Office of Business Economics) and the size of the population. Each state is assigned an OBE region code (e.g., 01- New England (CT ME MA NH RI VT)). The cumulative root frequency method was used to determine the imputation cells.
Imputations were performed for non-responding libraries using the data calculated from respondents in their imputation cells. Item imputation was performed on each record with nonresponsive variables. Following are descriptions of each imputation method1 used for the Public Libraries Survey.
Imputations were performed in two stages. In the first stage, imputations were carried out for nearly all missing values using the following methods: prior year times mean growth rate, adjusted cell mean, cell mean, prior year ratio, cell median ratio, direct substitution of prior year data, cell median, and special imputations. In the second stage, imputed values were adjusted for some missing values (based on the variable) using the following methods: obtained value by relationship of total to detail items, ranking, special imputations, and consistency checks.
# Appendix B. Technical Notes
FISCAL YEAR 2010
# Non-sampling Errors
Because all units in the universe are surveyed, the data are not subject to sampling error, but they are subject to non-sampling errors, such as errors in response, nonresponse errors, coverage errors arising from an incomplete listing of public libraries, coding errors, or processing errors.
IMLS made every effort to mitigate such errors. The editing efforts described above are designed to decrease the number of errors due to inaccurate response or due to processing problems. Imputation lessens the effect of nonresponse. IMLS makes efforts to obtain complete listings of public libraries from the state library agencies. Despite these efforts,, some non-sampling error likely remains in the data.
# Caveats for Using the Data
The data include imputations, at the unit and item levels, for nonresponding libraries. See the Imputation section for a discussion of imputation methodology. Comparisons to data prior to FY 1992 should be made with caution, as earlier data do not include imputations for nonresponse, and the percentage of libraries responding to a given item varied widely among the states.
State data comparisons should be made with caution because of differences in reporting periods (see Table B–1) and adherence to survey definitions. The definitions used by some states in collecting data from their public libraries may not be consistent with the PLS definitions.
The District of Columbia, while not a state, is included in this report. Special care should be used in comparing data for a city to state data. Caution should also be used in comparing Hawaii’s data to other states, as all public library data are reported under one entity, the Hawaii State Public Library System.
# Acknowledgments
Many individuals made important contributions to this report. The Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) is grateful for their dedication.
Following is the list of those individuals (alphabetical by group):
# U.S. Census Bureau staff:
J. Andrea Arroyo, Terri Craig, Suzanne Dorinski, Michael Freeman, Natasha Isaac, Patricia O’Shea, Peter Schilling, and Jennifer Scotto.
IMLS would like to extend a special thank you to members of the survey advisory group for their help in managing the survey process. The Library Statistics Working Group (LSWG) is a vital part of the survey team. Their time and effort has helped make this report a more valuable resource to the library community and the public.
# Library Services Working Group Members
Hulen Bivins, State Librarian, North Dakota State Library
Howard Boksenbaum, Chief of Library Services, Rhode Island Department of Administration
Cathleen Bourdon, Associate Executive Director, American Library Association
Kathy Rosa, Director, Office for Research and Statistics, American Library Association
Jo Budler, State Library, State Library of Kansas
Peter Haxton, State Data Coordinator, State Library of Kansas
Edythe “Edie” Huffman, State Data Coordinator, Indiana State Library
Martha Kyrillidou, Director of Statistics and Service Quality, Association of Research Libraries
Stacey Malek, State Data Coordinator, Texas State Library and Archives Commission
Susan Mark, State Data Coordinator, Wyoming State Library
Wayne Onkst, State Librarian and Commissioner, Kentucky Department for Libraries and Archives
Peggy D. Rudd, Director and Librarian, Texas State Library and Archives Commission
Diana Very, State Data Coordinator, Georgia Public Library Service
IMLS also extends sincere gratitude to the Chief Officers, State Data Coordinators, other State Library Agency staff, and public library directors and their staff who provided the data for this report. Their diligent efforts result in a national data resource with an exceptionally high response rate, year after year.

# Access Charlotte Pilot Summary
## What is Access Charlotte?
Internet Access Bridges Digital Divide for Charlotte Residents - YouTube
City of Charlotte
City of Charlotte
Watch later
Tap to unmute
If playback doesn't begin shortly, try restarting your device.
More videos
## More videos
You're signed out
Videos you watch may be added to the TV's watch history and influence TV recommendations. To avoid this, cancel and sign in to YouTube on your computer.
CancelConfirm
Include playlist
An error occurred while retrieving sharing information. Please try again later.
0:00 / 2:00
“Internet access today is foundational for learning, working, interacting with the government and other family members. It’s foundational to everyday life.”
Residents like Jasmine Harris are one of many that met with digital navigators who helped them acquire this service.
“This is a great program not only for our residents but for us because we are helping and aiding in making Mecklenburg County more digitally equitable.
Digital navigators are not only helping the young, but older residents like Katherine Howze who needs internet access to help with her research.
Along with free internet, the program also provides residents with the necessary resources to thrive digitally.
“When we provide someone with internet access, we’re also able to provide folks with training on how to use a computer to make sure if they want to connect with loved ones or don’t know how or don’t have the internet we can give them both the internet and a fully featured device they can use to connect with loved ones or even more forward into workforce development.”
It’s a small resource, residents say they are grateful the city is able to provide.
City Provides Free Wi-Fi to 5,000+ Households Through Access Charlotte Program - YouTube
City of Charlotte
City of Charlotte
Watch later
Tap to unmute
If playback doesn't begin shortly, try restarting your device.
More videos
## More videos
You're signed out
Videos you watch may be added to the TV's watch history and influence TV recommendations. To avoid this, cancel and sign in to YouTube on your computer.
CancelConfirm
Include playlist
An error occurred while retrieving sharing information. Please try again later.
0:00 / 2:41
00;00;00;00 - 00;00;03;13
JAMAR DAVIS
Access Charlotte started in 2020 during the height of the pandemic
00;00;03;20 - 00;00;07;00
JAMAR DAVIS
folks didn’t have access to hardware, didn't have access to proper Internet.
00;00;07;00 - 00;00;09;06
JAMAR DAVIS
Students were using their phone to be able to access
00;00;09;06 - 00;00;09;27
JAMAR DAVIS
do schoolwork.
00;00;09;27 - 00;00;13;20
JAMAR DAVIS
Access Charlotte kind of filled that need to touch base into some of those who
00;00;13;20 - 00;00;19;29
JAMAR DAVIS
live in the affordable housing communities to be able to access hardware, digital, online resources and
00;00;19;29 - 00;00;20;17
JAMAR DAVIS
00;00;20;17 - 00;00;26;29
JAMAR DAVIS
My name is Jamar Davis. I am the Access Charlotte coordinator for the Innovation and Technology Department.
00;00;26;29 - 00;00;31;03
JAMAR DAVIS
my role primarily is around managing the needs of the Access Charlotte program,
00;00;31;03 - 00;00;41;05
JAMAR DAVIS
being a part of this team has been essential in seeing how intricate and important data is to this work that we do under Access Charlotte.
00;00;41;05 - 00;00;48;29
JAMAR DAVIS
As we've gone into phase two of this program, starting off from phase one, where there was access to public Wi-Fi
00;00;48;29 - 00;01;01;17
JAMAR DAVIS
00;01;01;17 - 00;01;03;29
JAMAR DAVIS
Thanks to our partners over at the Center for Digital Equity.
00;01;03;29 - 00;01;05;12
JAMAR DAVIS
they have ramped up their
00;01;05;12 - 00;01;10;20
JAMAR DAVIS
workforce to provide access to Charlotte Digital Navigators to appoint them directly under Access Charlotte
00;01;10;20 - 00;01;18;27
JAMAR DAVIS
to connect the residents to hardware, digital resources and other small technical support opportunities.
00;01;18;27 - 00;01;22;01
JAMAR DAVIS
thanks to our partners at the Mecklenburg County Library
00;01;22;01 - 00;01;32;19
JAMAR DAVIS
00;01;32;19 - 00;01;35;19
JAMAR DAVIS
using E2D, which is a nonprofit company,
00;01;35;19 - 00;01;40;14
JAMAR DAVIS
around eliminating digital divide by connecting residents to computers in
00;01;40;14 - 00;01;41;17
JAMAR DAVIS
other hardware.
00;01;41;17 - 00;01;45;06
JAMAR DAVIS
also through 311, they can call 311 as simply as if
00;01;45;06 - 00;01;46;05
JAMAR DAVIS
they were to
00;01;46;05 - 00;01;50;05
JAMAR DAVIS
call to schedule trash pickup, they can call in and ask for a digital navigator
00;01;50;05 - 00;01;53;00
JAMAR DAVIS
I consider myself lucky? My mom came from City
00;01;53;00 - 00;01;56;02
JAMAR DAVIS
00;01;56;02 - 00;02;02;09
JAMAR DAVIS
00;02;02;09 - 00;02;08;12
JAMAR DAVIS
internet and not even have access to hardware and there being a space for that here in the city,
00;02;08;12 - 00;02;16;22
JAMAR DAVIS
00;02;16;22 - 00;02;23;26
JAMAR DAVIS
or just me saying if you're a parent, if you're a parent, or if your cousin or your niece lives in these areas, guess what?
00;02;24;00 - 00;02;25;03
JAMAR DAVIS
Internet's coming.
00;02;25;03 - 00;02;26;09
JAMAR DAVIS
00;02;26;09 - 00;02;33;21
JAMAR DAVIS
wonderful to feel to get to that point of knowing that Internet, especially Internet, is almost a utility rather than
00;02;33;21 - 00;02;35;22
JAMAR DAVIS
something of luxury.
## How did Access Charlotte start?
## How is Access Charlotte scaling?
A related project, Learn2Earn, was piloted at the West Boulevard Library from the city's partnership with the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Library around the Meck Tech Connect program. This pilot explores the idea of providing both digital literacy and computers to complement the internet service being offered in the area.
Stakeholders Collaborate with City of Charlotte to Bring Access Charlotte to Life - YouTube
City of Charlotte
City of Charlotte
Watch later
Tap to unmute
If playback doesn't begin shortly, try restarting your device.
More videos
## More videos
You're signed out
Videos you watch may be added to the TV's watch history and influence TV recommendations. To avoid this, cancel and sign in to YouTube on your computer.
CancelConfirm
Include playlist
An error occurred while retrieving sharing information. Please try again later.
0:00 / 6:48
00;00;00;00 - 00;00;05;23
LYNN DODSON
Hello, I'm Lynn Dodson and I’m with Spectrum. I'm Vice President of Sales for the Community Solutions Team.
00;00;05;23 - 00;00;17;07
LYNN DODSON
we're excited as a company to be participating in the program. You know, we're a very large company, but we have a large local footprint. So we have a 100 ... thousands of local
00;00;17;07 - 00;00;23;04
LYNN DODSON
employees here. And I think we're all excited to be part of the program and to support the program.
00;00;23;04 - 00;00;34;19
LYNN DODSON
Our broadband infrastructure is already in all the buildings. So we'll be able to move quickly to access, activate services for the residents and start the digital adoption.
00;00;34;19 - 00;00;54;07
LYNN DODSON
public private partnership is a great way to get the underserved community access quickly. Our partnership with Access Charlotte is just that, you know, we intend to quickly roll out our program to all the underserved and be able to access the services for the residents.
00;00;54;07 - 00;01;13;23
LYNN DODSON
I think we all found during the pandemic how important connectivity was. And I think we saw a lot of folks who were left behind during that time. And I think this was a great opportunity to get access to Access Charlotte and Spectrum for all those folks who can really use the connectivity.
00;01;13;23 - 00;01;30;26
KESHIA BRINKLEY
00;01;30;26 - 00;01;40;15
KESHIA BRINKLEY
for our agents so that they can provide seamless and excellent customer service and so that they're also following the things that the back end departments want done.
00;01;40;15 - 00;02;03;16
KESHIA BRINKLEY
we also have partnered with several outside organizations such as the CDE, the Center for Digital Equity. So we actually take calls for them and we refer them over to their digital navigators program, which kind of ties in to Access Charlotte, which is why we're so excited that they included 311.
00;02;03;16 - 00;02;25;21
KESHIA BRINKLEY
00;02;25;21 - 00;02;35;05
KESHIA BRINKLEY
bridge that divide where there's people who don't have Internet access, who don't have access to to laptops and things of that nature.
00;02;35;11 - 00;02;53;05
KESHIA BRINKLEY
And so by us teaming up with Access Charlotte, as well as the CDE, it allows us to make our community stronger, which is part of our part of the 311 mission, like we want to strengthen the community, make it a strong community, one interaction at a time.
00;02;53;05 - 00;02;58;13
EMERY ORTIZ
I'm Emery Ortiz. I am the chief strategy and innovation officer for the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Library.
00;02;58;13 - 00;03;05;23
EMERY ORTIZ
right now we are focusing a lot on digital equity work and just the various resources that we can bring to the community in that way.
00;03;05;23 - 00;03;21;02
EMERY ORTIZ
public libraries have been at the forefront of digital equity work for decades, and we really appreciate the chance to collaborate with organizations like the Center for Digital Equity in providing our communities with vital resources.
00;03;21;02 - 00;03;30;04
EMERY ORTIZ
Access Charlotte is something we're really excited to be a part of. This work is, you know, vast and none of us have the capacity to do it on our own.
00;03;30;06 - 00;03;46;24
EMERY ORTIZ
00;03;46;24 - 00;04;01;03
EMERY ORTIZ
digital access is such an essential component to everyday life. Now that the equity piece of that we do not want to leave anyone behind, we want everyone to have the same opportunities as everyone else. And so digital equity is a key component to that.
00;04;01;03 - 00;04;28;09
EMERY ORTIZ
with the access that Access Charlotte will provide, that Internet connectivity piece will be there for so many of our citizens and which is absolutely critical where other organizations like the CDE and the public library can fill in is with the hardware, the technology, with the resources and with guided, you know, digital literacy and information courses to really help, you know, someone get from point A to point B in that journey.
00;04;28;09 - 00;04;44;00
EMERY ORTIZ
00;04;44;00 - 00;04;59;25
EMERY ORTIZ
00;05;00;06 - 00;05;07;12
EMERY ORTIZ
00;05;07;12 - 00;05;12;27
NATALI BETANCUR
I'm Natali Betancur and the Deputy Director at the Center for Digital Equity with Queen's University of Charlotte.
00;05;12;27 - 00;05;26;17
NATALI BETANCUR
we bring together the public sector, the private sector, nonprofit organizations and community members to co-create solutions that ultimately help our community members thrive in today's modern culture.
00;05;26;17 - 00;05;39;24
NATALI BETANCUR
the Center for Digital Equity has a critical role in the Access Charlotte program. And what we're going to do is really bring a holistic approach to getting community members connected.
00;05;39;24 - 00;05;48;15
NATALI BETANCUR
we're not only looking at getting individuals and households connected to the Internet, but also do they need a device that they can utilize that Internet on?
00;05;48;15 - 00;05;52;01
NATALI BETANCUR
Digital equity is is no longer a luxury, right?
00;05;52;01 - 00;06;02;05
NATALI BETANCUR
Having access is not a luxury. Having access in today's society is as necessary as your electricity and as your water.
00;06;02;05 - 00;06;06;26
NATALI BETANCUR
access itself is critical to thrive in today's modern society.
00;06;06;26 - 00;06;20;08
NATALI BETANCUR
as an immigrant myself, I think I firsthand experience the immense amount of barriers around not only access, navigating and language and all of these different barriers.
00;06;20;08 - 00;06;32;20
NATALI BETANCUR
it's on a personal level, I feel very invested in this, but it's also as a team, our mission is to make Mecklenburg County the most digitally equitable community in America.
## How is Access Charlotte funded?
## What areas does the Access Charlotte pilot cover?
Workbook: Access Charlotte Internet Investments
Unexpected Error
This program helps reduce the overall cost of broadband service and connected devices for residents in eligible households.
Digital Navigators Serve the Community and Help Residents Meet Digital Needs - YouTube
City of Charlotte
City of Charlotte
Watch later
Tap to unmute
If playback doesn't begin shortly, try restarting your device.
More videos
## More videos
You're signed out
Videos you watch may be added to the TV's watch history and influence TV recommendations. To avoid this, cancel and sign in to YouTube on your computer.
CancelConfirm
Include playlist
An error occurred while retrieving sharing information. Please try again later.
0:00 / 2:35
Denya Isabelle-Davis: My name is Denya Isabelle-Davis.
Naimah Martin: Naimah Martin.
Denya and Naimah: And I'm a digital navigator with the
Center for Digital Equity.
Denya Isabelle-Davis: So as a digital navigator, it is my duty
to connect community members to different digital resources in
the community. That could be the affordable connectivity program,
which will offer them $30 off of their internet service. It could
be digital literacy skills through Northstar or through
Mecklenburg County Libraries or other resources that we have.
Naimah Martin: Also with devices, we partner with the
Charlotte-Mecklenburg libraries, and other nonprofits within the
community. Also, we ensure that if they need any assistance with
their product, or the device that they received, that they
get assistance with that.
Denya Isabelle-Davis: I've always been in the business of
helping people. That's one of my passions in life and being able
to do that from a digital standpoint, because we're in
such a modern world, like it, it just made sense for me to be
able to still assist individuals in the community.
Naimah Martin: I thought this was a great opportunity to be
able to help residents within Mecklenburg County, become, you
know, more familiar with digital services here. Because
technology is forever changing. And we want to make sure each
resident is aware and they know what to expect with the new
technologies that emerge every day.
Denya Isabelle-Davis: This is something that Charlotte hasn't
done before. And so just being at the forefront of it being you
know, the pilot of it, and being able to let these community
members know that, you know, there is a world outside of what
they may be used to. So helping them to get connected to these
digital resources outside of them getting access to this
internet service. It makes me feel like I'm doing something,
I'm doing my part in society.
Naimah Martin: It means a lot because I'm giving back to the
community, I'm able to, you know, help others and just show
them that there's different opportunities within technology,
things that they can learn to do with within themselves and with
their families.
Denya Isabelle-Davis: I'm hoping that the community will
understand that, you know, we are transitioning to a really,
really highly technical world. And so that they know that they
won't be left behind there is someone in their corner that is
there to assist them every step of the way.
## Outreach, Data, and Post-Pilot Considerations
This project is currently limited to the APRA funding timeline and spending parameters. From this pilot, the city aims to forge innovative solutions working with partners in the community around longer-term solutions and sustainable illumination of the digital divide. This includes working with affordable housing property owners and their managers, working with public and private sector partners, and supporting upward mobility of residents around access and benefit of digital connectivity.
Live Support hours are from 7am - 7pm.
Olark launch button clip path
CLT Support